?
3
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. C is a 22-year-old man who complains of diffuse
abdominal pain.
What is the differential diagnosis of abdominal
pain? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Abdominal pain is the most common cause for hospital admission
in the United States. Diagnoses range from benign entities (eg, irri-
table bowel syndrome [IBS]) to life-threatening diseases (eg, rup-
tured abdominal aortic aneurysms [AAAs]). The first pivotal step in
diagnosing abdominal pain is to identify the location of the pain.
The differential diagnosis can then be narrowed to a subset of con-
ditions that cause pain in that particular quadrant of the abdomen
(Figure 3–1 and Summary table of abdominal pain by location at
the end of the chapter). The character and acuity of the pain are
also pivotal features that help prioritize the differential diagnosis.
Other important historical points include factors that make the
pain better or worse (eg, eating), radiation of the pain, duration of
the pain, and associated symptoms (nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
inability to pass stool and flatus, melena, hematochezia, fever, chills,
weight loss, altered bowel habits, orthostatic symptoms, or urinary
symptoms). Pulmonary symptoms or a cardiac history can be clues
to pneumonia or myocardial infarction (MI) presenting as abdomi-
nal pain. In women, sexual and menstrual histories are important.
The patient should be asked about alcohol consumption.
A few points about the physical exam are worth emphasizing.
First, vital signs are just that, vital. Hypotension, fever, tachypnea,
and tachycardia are pivotal clinical clues that must not be over-
looked. The HEENT exam should look for pallor or icterus. Care-
ful heart and lung exams can suggest pneumonia or other extra-
abdominal causes of abdominal pain. 
The physical exam of a patient with abdominal
pain includes more than just the abdominal exam.
Of course, the abdominal exam is key. Inspection assesses for dis-
tention (often associated with bowel obstruction or ascites). Auscul-
tation evaluates whether bowel sounds are present. Absent bowel
sounds may suggest an intra-abdominal catastrophe; high-pitched
tinkling sounds and rushes suggest an intestinal obstruction. Palpa-
tion should be done last. It is useful to distract the patient by contin-
uing to talk with him or her during abdominal palpation. This allows
the examiner to get a better appreciation of the location and sever-
ity of maximal tenderness. The clinician should palpate the painful
area last. The rectal exam should be performed, and the stool tested
for occult blood. Finally, the pelvic exam should be performed in
adult women and the testicular exam in men.
1
Mr. C felt well until the onset of pain several hours ago.
He reports that the pain is a pressure-like sensation in
the mid-abdomen, which is not particularly severe. He
reports no fever, nausea, or vomiting. His appetite is
diminished, and he has not had a bowel movement since
the onset of pain. He reports no history of urinary symp-
toms such as frequency, dysuria, or hematuria. His past
medical history is unremarkable. On physical exam, his
vital signs are temperature 37.0°C, RR 16 breaths per
minute, BP 110/72 mm Hg, and pulse 85 bpm. His cardiac
and pulmonary exams are normal. Abdominal exam
reveals a flat abdomen with hypoactive but positive bowel
sounds. He has no rebound or guarding; although he has
some mild diffuse tenderness, he has no focal or marked
tenderness. There is no hepatosplenomegaly. Rectal
exam is nontender, and stool is guaiac negative.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The patient’s history is not particularly suggestive of any diagnosis.
Focus your attention on diseases associated with mid-abdominal
pain. Appendicitis should always be considered in young, otherwise
healthy patients with unexplained abdominal pain. Peptic ulcer dis-
ease (PUD) and pancreatitis may also present with epigastric or
mid-abdominal pain. Table 3–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
Mr. C reports no history of nonsteroidal antiinflamma-
tory drug (NSAID), aspirin, or alcohol ingestion. He has
no known gallstones and no prior history of abdominal
surgery. He reports that he is passing flatus and denies
vomiting.
I have a patient with abdominal pain.
How do I determine the cause?
26
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  27
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Appendicitis
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation of appendicitis is abdominal pain that is
initially diffuse and then intensifies and migrates toward the right
lower quadrant (RLQ) to McBurney point (1.5–2 inches from the
anterior superior iliac crest toward umbilicus). Patients often com-
plain of bloating and anorexia.
Disease Highlights
A. Appendicitis is one of most common causes of an acute
abdomen, with a 7% lifetime occurrence rate.
B. It develops secondary to obstruction of the appendiceal orifice
with secondary mucus accumulation, swelling, ischemia,
necrosis, and perforation.
C. Initially, the pain is poorly localized. However, progressive
inflammation eventually involves the parietal peritoneum,
resulting in pain localized to the RLQ.
D. The risk of perforation increases steadily with age (ages 10–40,
10%; age 60, 30%; and age > 75, 50%).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Most individual clinical findings have a low sensitivity for
appendicitis making it difficult to rule out the diagnosis. 
1. In one study, guarding was completely absent in 22% of
patients, and rebound was completely absent in 16% of
patients with appendicitis.  
2. Fever was present in only 40% of patients with perforated
appendices. 
Fever, severe tenderness, guarding, and rebound
may be absent in patients with appendicitis. 
B. Nonetheless, certain classic findings increase the likelihood of
appendicitis when present (ie, rebound, guarding) (Table 3–2).
C. History is particularly important in women to differentiate
other causes of RLQ pain (eg, pelvic inflammatory disease
[PID], ruptured ectopic pregnancy, ovarian torsion, and rup-
tured ovarian cyst). The most useful clinical clues that suggest
PID include the following:
MI 
PUD
Pancreatitis
Biliary disease
IBD
Bowel obstruction
or ischemia
Appendicitis
AAA
IBS, DKA
Gastroenteritis
Biliary disease
Hepatitis
Renal colic
Diverticulitis
Diverticulitis
Splenic injury
Renal colic
Appendicitis
Ovarian disease
PID
Ruptured ectopic 
pregnancy
Ovarian disease
PID
Ruptured ectopic 
pregnancy
AAA, abdominal aortic aneurysm; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease;  
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome;  MI, myocardial infarction;  PID, pelvic inflammatory disease;  
PUD, peptic ulcer disease.
Figure 3–1. The differential diagnosis of abdominal pain by location.
1. History of PID
2. Vaginal discharge
3. Cervical motion tenderness on pelvic exam
Rule out ectopic pregnancy in women of child-
bearing age who complain of abdominal pain by
testing urine for β-HCG.
D. Symptoms are different in octogenerians than in patients aged
60–79 years. 
1. The duration of symptoms is longer prior to evaluation
(48 vs 24 hours). 
2. They are less likely to report pain that migrated to the
RLQ (29% vs 49%). 
E. WBC
1. Very low WBCs (< 7000/mcL) and very high WBCs
(> 17,000/mcL) substantially decrease or increase the like-
lihood of appendicitis respectively (see Table 3–2). Mod-
erate elevations are less predictive.
2. A low WBC does not exclude appendicitis in patients who
have severe rebound or guarding; 80% of such patients
had appendicitis even when WBC < 8000/mcL.
The WBC is not reliably elevated in patients with
acute appendicitis.
F. Urinalysis may be confusing and reveal pyuria and hematuria
due to bladder inflammation from an adjacent appendicitis.
G. Plain radiography is useful only to detect free air or signs of
another process (ie, small bowel obstruction [SBO]).
H. CT scanning is an accurate imaging method that is helpful
when the diagnosis is uncertain. Studies have shown that it is
more sensitive than ultrasonography in adults.
1. CT scanning: 94% sensitive, 94% specific; LR+, 15.6;
LR–, 0.06
2. Ultrasonography: 83% sensitive, 93% specific; LR+, 11.9;
LR–, 0.18
3. One study showed that only 3% of patients who had a CT
scan performed preoperatively underwent unnecessary appen-
dectomy versus 6–13% of patients who did not have a CT
scan performed. CT scanning resulted in lower overall costs.
4. Although ultrasonography is inferior to CT scanning, it
should be substituted for CT scanning in pregnant patients.
Treatment
A. Observation is critical
B. Monitor urinary output, vital signs
C. IV fluid resuscitation
D. Broad-spectrum antibiotics, including gram-negative and
anaerobic coverage
E. Urgent appendectomy
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Mr. C’s symptoms are consistent with—but certainly not diag-
nostic of—appendicitis. None of the historical features (ie, no
alcohol use, NSAID ingestion, or prior abdominal surgery) sug-
gest any of the alternative diagnoses of pancreatitis, PUD, or
bowel obstruction. Diagnostic options include obtaining a CBC
(clearly of limited value), continued observation and reexamina-
tion, surgical consultation, and obtaining a CT scan. Given the
lack of evidence for any of the less concerning possibilities you
remain concerned that the patient has early appendicitis. You elect
to observe the patient, obtain a CBC and lipase, and ask for a sur-
gical consult.
28 /  CHAPTER 3
Table 3–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Appendicitis
Migration of pain
Clinical exam
from periumbilical
CT scan
region to right
lower quadrant
Active Alternatives-Most Common
Peptic ulcer
NSAID use
Esophagogastro-
Helicobacter
duodenoscopy
pylori infection
Urea breath 
Melena 
test for H pylori
Pain relieved by eating
Pancreatitis
Alcohol abuse
Serum lipase
Gallstones
Active Alternatives-Must Not Miss
Early bowel 
Inability to pass
Abdominal 
obstruction
stool or flatus
radiographs,
Nausea, vomiting
CT scan
Prior abdominal
Small bowel study 
surgery
Barium enema
Table 3–2. Classic clinical and laboratory findings in
appendicitis.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR +
LR −
Clinical Findings 
Fever > 38.1°C
15–67%
85%
1
1
Vomiting
49%
76%
2.0
0.7
Pain migration to RLQ 
54%
63%
1.5
0.7
RLQ tenderness
88%
33%
1.3
0.4
Guarding 
46%
92%
5.5
0.59
(moderate to severe)
Rebound
61%
82%
3.5
0.47
(moderate to severe)
Laboratory Findings 
WBC > 7000/mcL 
98%
21%
1.2
0.1
WBC > 11,000/mcL 
76%
74%
2.9
0.3
WBC > 17,000/mcL 
15%
98%
7.5
0.9
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  29
Frequent clinical observations are exceptionally use-
ful when evaluating a patient with possible appen-
dicitis.
1
The CBC reveals a WBC of 8700/mcl (86% neutrophils,
0% bands) and a Hct of 44%. The lipase is normal. The
surgical resident evaluates the patient who complains
that the pain is now more severe in the RLQ. On exam, the
patient’s abdomen is moderately tender but still without
rebound or guarding. The surgical resident agrees that
the normal CBC and absence of fever do not exclude
appendicitis and recommends an abdominal CT scan.
The migration of pain to the RLQ is suggestive of appendicitis.
Less likely considerations might include Crohn ileitis as well as
diverticulitis or colon cancer (both unlikely in this age group). If
our patient were a woman, PID and ovarian pathology (ruptured
ectopic pregnancy, ovarian torsion, or ruptured ovarian cyst)
would also need to be considered. 
Diffuse abdominal pain that subsequently localizes
and becomes more constant, suggests parietal peri-
toneal inflammation.
1
The CT scan reveals a hypodense fluid collection on the
right side inferior to the cecum. An appendolith is seen.
The interpretation is possible appendiceal perforation
versus Crohn disease.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
The patient’s symptom complex, particularly the pain’s
migration, localization, and intensification are highly sug-
gestive of appendicitis. CT findings make this diagnosis
likely. At this point, surgical exploration is appropriate.
The patient undergoes surgery and purulent material is
found in the peritoneal cavity. A necrotic appendix is
removed, and the peritoneal cavity is irrigated. The patient
is treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics and does well
postoperatively.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Ms. R is a 50-year-old woman who comes to the office
complaining of abdominal pain. The patient reports that
she has been having “episodes” or “attacks” of abdominal
pain over the last several months. She reports that the
attacks of pain are in the epigastrium, last up to 4 hours,
and often awaken her at night. The pain is described as a
severe cramping-like sensation that is very intense and
steady for hours. Occasionally, the pain radiates to the
right back. The pain is associated with emesis. She may
get several attacks in a week or go weeks or months with-
out them. She reports that the color of her urine and
stool are normal. On physical exam, her vital signs are
stable. She is afebrile. On HEENT exam, she is anicteric.
Her lungs are clear, and cardiac exam is unremarkable.
Abdominal exam is soft with only mild epigastric discom-
fort to deep palpation. Murphy sign (tenderness in the
right upper quadrant [RUQ] with palpation during inspi-
ration) is negative. Rectal exam reveals guaiac-negative
stool.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The pivotal features of Ms. R’s abdominal pain are its epigastric
location, episodic frequency, colicky quality, and its severe inten-
sity. Epigastric pain is commonly caused by PUD, biliary colic,
and pancreatitis. Well-defined discrete episodes of abdominal
pain are more typical of biliary colic than either PUD or pancre-
atitis. Other causes of intermittent abdominal pain include IBS
and chronic mesenteric ischemia. Finally, the severe intense
crampy quality (colic) suggests obstruction of a hollow viscera,
which can be caused by biliary colic, bowel obstruction, or
ureteral obstruction (eg, due to nephrolithiasis). Given the epi-
gastric location, recurring episodic nature, quality and intensity
of the pain, biliary colic is most likely. Table 3–3 lists the differ-
ential diagnosis.
2
Ms. R reports no history of alcohol bingeing, NSAID use,
or known PUD. The pain does not improve with food or
antacids. She denies any history of flank pain or hema-
turia. The pain is not relieved by defecation. There is no
history of coronary artery disease (CAD) or peripheral
vascular disease.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
30 /  CHAPTER 3
Leading Hypothesis: Biliary Colic
Textbook Presentation
Gallstone disease may present as incidentally discovered asympto-
matic cholelithiasis, biliary colic, cholecystitis, cholangitis, or pan-
creatitis. The pattern depends on the location of the stone and its
chronicity (Figure 3–2). Biliary colic typically presents with
episodes of intense abdominal pain that begin 1 hour or more
after eating. The pain is usually located in the RUQ, although epi-
gastric pain is also common. The pain may radiate to the back and
may be associated with nausea and vomiting. The pain usually
lasts for more than 30 minutes and may last for hours.
Disease Highlights
A. Asymptomatic cholelithiasis
1. Predisposing factors
a. Increasing age is the predominant risk factor. The
prevalence is 8% in patients older than 40 years and
20% in those older than 60 years (Figure 3–3).
b. Obesity
c. Gender: more women are affected than men (risk
increased during pregnancy)
d. Gallbladder stasis (due to rapid weight loss, which may
occur in patients on very low calorie diets, on total par-
enteral nutrition, and after surgery)
e. Family history
f. Crohn disease
g. Hemolytic anemias can lead to increased bilirubin
excretion and bilirubin stones (eg, thalassemia, sickle
cell disease)
2. Cholecystectomy not advised for patients with asympto-
matic cholelithiasis.
Make sure the gallstones are causing the pain before
advising cholecystectomy.
3. Annual risk of biliary colic developing in patients with
asymptomatic gallstones is 1–4%. 
B. Biliary colic
1. Occurs when gallstone becomes lodged in cystic duct and
the gallbladder contracts against the obstruction
2. Presents as one of the classic visceral obstructive syn-
dromes with severe, constant, and crampy waves of pain
that incapacitate the patient
3. The pain usually lasts < 2–4 hours. An episode longer
than 4–6 hours, fever, or marked tenderness, suggest
cholecystitis.
4. Characterized by episodes of pain with pain free intervals
of weeks to years.
5. Pain begins 1–4 hours after eating or may awaken the
patient during the night. May be precipitated by fatty
meals.
6. The pain is usually associated with nausea and vomiting.
7. Resolution occurs if the stone comes out of the gallbladder
neck. The intense pain improves fairly rapidly, although
mild discomfort may persist for 1 to 2 days.
8. Biliary colic recurs in 50% of symptomatic patients.
9. Complications (eg, pancreatitis, acute cholecystitis, or
ascending cholangitis) occur in 1–2% of patients with bil-
iary colic per year.
10. Colic occasionally develops in patients without stones
secondary to sphincter of Oddi dysfunction or scarring
leading to obstruction.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Pain is located in RUQ in 54% of cases and in the epigas-
trium in 34% of cases. It may occur as a band across the entire
upper abdomen, or rarely in the mid-abdomen. Pain may
radiate to back, right scapula, right flank, or chest.
B. Laboratory tests (liver function tests [LFTs]), lipase, urinaly-
sis) should be normal in uncomplicated biliary colic. Abnor-
malities suggest other diagnoses.
C. Ultrasonography is the test of choice; sensitivity 89%, speci-
ficity 97%, LR+ 30, LR−0.11 (CT scan is only 79% sensitive.) 
D. Endoscopic ultrasound is 100% sensitive and is useful in
patients with a negative transabdominal ultrasound but in
whom biliary colic is still strongly suspected.
Table 3–3. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. R.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Biliary colic
Episodic and crampy
Ultrasonography
pain may
radiate to back
Active Alternatives-Most Common
Peptic ulcer
NSAID use 
EGD
disease
Helicobacter 
Urea breath 
pylori infection
test for H pylori
Melena
Pain relieved by
eating or by antacids
Pancreatitis
Alcohol abuse
Serum lipase
Gallstones
Renal colic
Hematuria
Urinalysis
Radiation to
Renal CT scan
flank, groin,
genitals
Irritable bowel
Long history (years)
Rome criteria and
syndrome 
of intermittent pain
absence of alarm 
relieved by
symptoms (eg,
defecation or
anemia, fever, weight
associated with
loss, positive fecal 
diarrhea
occult blood test)
Exclusion of other
diagnoses
Active Alternatives-Must Not Miss 
Chronic
Postprandial pain
Mesenteric duplex
mesenteric
Weight loss
ultrasonography
ischemia
CAD or PVD
Angiogram
CAD, coronary artery disease; EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy;
NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PVD, peripheral vascular disease.
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  31
Treatment
A. Cholecystectomy is recommended.
B. Lithotripsy is not advised.
C. Dissolution therapies (eg, ursodiol) are reserved for nonsurgi-
cal candidates.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Ms. R’s history suggests biliary colic. You order an ultrasound of
the RUQ.
2
A RUQ ultrasound reveals multiple small gallstones
within the gallbladder. The common bile duct (CBD) is nor-
mal, and no other abnormalities are seen. A serum lipase
and LFTs are normal, and urea breath test for Helicobac-
ter pylori is negative.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, biliary colic? Have
you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: IBS
Textbook Presentation
Patients often complain of intermittent abdominal pain accompa-
nied by diarrhea or constipation or both of years duration. The diar-
rhea is often associated with cramps that are relieved by defecation.
Pain cannot be explained by structural or biochemical abnormalities.
Weight loss or anemia should alert the clinician to other possibilities.
New persistent changes in bowel habits (either diar-
rhea or constipation) should be thoroughly evalu-
ated to exclude colon cancer, inflammatory bowel
disease (IBD), or other process. An assumption of
IBS in such patients is inappropriate.
Disease Highlights
A. Affects 10–15% of adults, women 2 times more than men.
B. Etiology is a combination of altered motility, visceral hyper-
sensitivity, autonomic function, and psychological factors.
Liver
Duodenum
Gallbladder
Stone location & associated complications
Cystic duct: Biliary colic, cholecystitis
Common bile duct (choledocholithiasis): Ascending
cholangitis, pancreatitis, (if blocking pancreatic duct)
Figure 3–2. Common sites of calculus formation. (Modified, with permission, Bateson MC. Gallbladder disease,
BMJ. 1999;318:1745–1748.)
0–9
10–39 40–49 50–59 60–69
Age (years)
70–79 80–89
> 90
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Prevalence (%)
Men
Women
Figure 3–3. Prevalence of asymptomatic gallstones by age.
(Reproduced, with permission, from the BMJ Publishing Group,
Bateson MC. Gallbladder disease. BMJ. 1999;318:1745–48.)
32 /  CHAPTER 3
C. Symptoms often exacerbated by psychological or physical
stressors
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. There are no known biochemical or structural markers for
IBS.
B. The diagnosis is usually made by a combination of (1) fulfill-
ing the Rome criteria, (2) the absence of alarm features, and
(3) a limited work-up to exclude other diseases.
1. Rome criteria: Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort
(of ≥6 months duration) at least 3 days per month for the past
3 months, associated with two or more of the following:
a. Improvement with defecation
b. Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool 
c. Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of
stool
2. Alarm symptoms (suggest alternative diagnosis and neces-
sitate evaluation)
a. Positive fecal occult blood test or rectal bleeding
b. Anemia
c. Weight loss > 10 lbs
d. Fever
e. Persistent diarrhea causing dehydration
f. Severe constipation or fecal impaction
g. Family history of colorectal cancer
h. Onset of symptoms at age 50 years or older
i. Major change in symptoms
j. Nocturnal symptoms
k. Recent antibiotic use
3. Work-up
a. Common recommendations for patients fulfilling
Rome criteria without alarm symptoms include the fol-
lowing: 
(1) Obtain a CBC
(2) Test stool for occult blood
(3) Perform serologic tests for celiac sprue (eg, IgA
tGT or IgA EMA) in patients with diarrhea as the
predominant symptom
(4) Routine chemistries are recommended by some
experts.  
b. Colonoscopy with biopsy (to rule out microscopic coli-
tis) is recommended in patients with alarm symptoms,
in those aged ≥50 years, and in patients with a marked
change in symptoms.
c. There is no evidence that routine flexible sigmoi-
doscopy or colonoscopy is necessary in young patients
without alarm symptoms.
d. In addition to the above testing, the following should
be evaluated in patients with alarm symptoms:  
(1) TSH levels
(2) Basic chemistries 
(3) Stool for Clostridium difficile toxin and presence of
ova and parasites 
e. A variety of serum and fecal markers, including ASCA,
pANCA, fecal calprotectin, and fecal lactoferrin, are
useful in selected patients and can suggest bowel
inflammation or IBD.
Treatment
A. Nonspecific management
1. Certain foods may worsen symptoms in some patients.
2. Common offenders include milk products, caffeine, alco-
hol, fatty foods, gas-producing vegetables, and sorbitol
products (sugarless gum and diet candy).
3. A food diary can help identify triggers.
B. Specific therapy is based on predominant syndrome.
1. When abdominal pain is the predominant symptom
a. Modify diet when applicable
b. Medications include anticholinergics (dicyclomine,
hyoscyamine), nitrates, low-dose tricyclic antidepres-
sants (amitriptyline or nortriptyline) or smooth muscle
relaxants (effective but not available in United States).
c. Cognitive behavioral therapy appears to be as effective
as pharmacologic therapy.
2. When diarrhea is the predominant symptom
a. Change diet when applicable
b. Medications include loperamide, diphenoxylate, and
cholestyramine.
c. Alosetron is a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist that is useful
in women with diarrhea-predominant IBS. 
(1) However, rare but serious complications have
occurred including bowel obstruction and ischemic
colitis. 
(2) Alosetron is recommended only in women with
severe diarrhea-predominant IBS who have not
responded to other antidiarrheal therapies. 
3. When constipation is the predominant symptom
a. Change in diet (fiber, psyllium)
b. Osmotic laxative: Lactulose, polyethylene glycol, or other
C. Treat underlying lactose intolerance. Such treatment in lactase
deficient individuals with IBS markedly reduces outpatient
visits.
Alternative Diagnosis: PUD
See Chapter 27, Involuntary Weight Loss.
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Pancreatitis
(see below)
Alternative Diagnosis: Ischemic Bowel
Three distinct clinical subtypes of ischemic bowel include chronic
mesenteric ischemia (chronic small bowel ischemia), acute mesen-
teric ischemia (acute ischemia of small bowel) and ischemic colitis
(ischemia of the large bowel).
1. Chronic Mesenteric Ischemia
Textbook Presentation
Patients with chronic mesenteric ischemia typically complain of
recurrent postprandial abdominal pain (often in the first hour and
diminishing 1–2 hours later), food fear, and weight loss. Patients
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  33
often have a history of tobacco use, peripheral vascular disease or
CAD. 
Disease Highlights
A. Secondary to near obstructive atherosclerotic disease of the
superior mesenteric artery (SMA) or celiac artery or both 
B. Arterial stenosis results in an imbalance between intestinal oxy-
gen supply and demand that is accentuated after eating lead-
ing to intestinal angina resulting in food fear and weight loss
C. Two or more vessels (ie, SMA and celiac artery) are involved
in 91% of affected patients. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Weight loss occurs in 80% of patients and is due to food
aversion.
B. Although stenoses are common (18% of population over age
65 years), symptomatic chronic ischemia is rare, and docu-
mented stenosis does not confirm the diagnosis of mesenteric
ischemia. It is important to exclude more common disorders
(ie, PUD and gallstone disease).
C. Duplex ultrasonography is very sensitive (> 90%) and can be
used as the initial diagnostic tool. Normal results make the
diagnosis very unlikely. 
D. CT angiography and magnetic resonance angiography have
also been used. Angiography should be considered if the
results of noninvasive testing suggest vascular obstruction.  
Treatment
Revascularization (surgical repair or angioplasty [with stent]) is the
only treatment. 
2. Acute Mesenteric Ischemia
Textbook Presentation
Acute mesenteric ischemia is a life-threatening condition that vir-
tually always presents with the abrupt onset of acute severe
abdominal pain that is typically out of proportion to a relatively
benign physical exam. Acute mesenteric ischemia usually occurs in
patients with risk factors of arterial thrombosis or systemic
embolization. 
Disease Highlights
A. Usually due to SMA or celiac artery embolism (50%). Other
causes include thrombosis (15–25%), low flow states without
obstruction 20–30% (nonobstructive mesenteric ischemia
[NOMI]), and mesenteric venous thrombosis (5%). 
1. Embolism 
a. Risk factors include atrial fibrillation, acute MI, valvular
heart disease, heart failure (HF), ventricular aneurysms,
angiography of abdominal aorta, and hypercoagulable
states.
b. The onset is often sudden without prior symptoms.
2. Thrombosis
a. Usually occurs in patients with atherosclerotic disease
of the involved artery. 
b. Approximately half of such patients have a prior
history of chronic mesenteric ischemia with intes-
tinal angina. 
3. Nonobstructive mesenteric ischemia 
a. Often occurs in elderly patients with mesenteric ather-
osclerotic disease and superimposed hypotension (due
to MI, HF, cardiopulmonary bypass, dialysis, or sepsis) 
b. May also occur after cocaine use and following
endurance exercise activities (eg, marathon, cycling).
4. Mesenteric venous thrombosis is often secondary to portal
hypertension, hypercoagulable states, and intra-abdominal
inflammation.
B. Patients have acute abdominal pain that is often out of pro-
portion to their abdominal exam. If left untreated, bowel
infarction and peritoneal findings will develop.
C. Incidence: 0.1–0.3% of hospital admissions
D. Mortality is high at 30–65%.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Common presenting symptoms are abdominal pain (94%),
nausea (56%), vomiting (38%), and diarrhea (31%).
B. 50% of patients have a prior history of intestinal angina
C. The WBC is abnormal in 90% of patients and often markedly
elevated. (Mean WBC 21.4 × 109/mL)
D. Lactate level was elevated in 77–89% of patients (mean
3.3 mmol/L (normal < 2.0 mmol/L)
A normal lactate level does not rule out acute
mesenteric ischemia.
E. Plain abdominal radiographs may reveal thickening of bowel
loops or thumbprinting but are insensitive (40%).
F. Doppler ultrasonography is insensitive due to distended bowel.
G. Standard CT scanning may demonstrate SMA occlusion or
findings suggesting ischemic and necrosis such as segmental
bowel wall thickening or pneumatosis but is insensitive (64%).
H. Although CT angiography and magnetic resonance angiogra-
phy have been used, direct angiography is the gold standard
and recommended. 
Treatment
A. Emergent revascularization (via thromboembolectomy, throm-
bolysis, vascular bypass or angioplasty) and surgical resection
of necrotic bowel are the mainstays of therapy. Prompt surgi-
cal intervention (< 12 hours) reduces mortality compared with
delayed intervention (> 12 hours) (14% vs 75%). 
B. Broad-spectrum antibiotics
C. Volume resuscitation
D. Preoperative and postoperative anticoagulation to prevent
thrombus propagation
E. For patients with NOMI, improved perfusion is paramount.
F. Intra-arterial papaverine has been used to block reactive mesen-
teric arteriolar vasoconstriction and improve blood flow.
3. Ischemic Colitis
Textbook Presentation
Ischemic colitis typically presents with left-sided abdominal pain.
Patients frequently have bloody or maroon stools or diarrhea.
Profuse bleeding is unusual. 
34 /  CHAPTER 3
Disease Highlights
A. Usually due to nonocclusive decrease in colonic perfusion 
B. Typically involves the watershed areas of the colon, most
commonly the splenic flexure, descending colon, and rec-
tosigmoid junction 
C. Precipitating events may include hypotension, MI, sepsis, or
HF, but the cause is not usually identified. 
D. Uncommon causes include vasculitis, hypercoagulable states,
vasoconstrictors, vascular surgery, drugs (eg, alosetron) and
long distance running or bicycling (presumably due to shunt-
ing and hypoperfusion).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Abdominal pain (not usually severe) is reported by 84% of
patients.
B. Hematochezia is a helpful diagnostic clue when present but
not diagnostic when absent. Sensitivity 46%, specificity
90.9%; LR+ 5.1, LR– 0.6
C. Diarrhea is seen in approximately 40% of patients.
D. Abdominal tenderness is common (81%), but rebound ten-
derness is rare (15%).
E. Risk factors that increase the likelihood of ischemic colitis
include age > 60 years, hemodialysis, hypertension, diabetes,
hypoalbuminemia, and medications that induce constipation. 
F. Features that distinguish acute mesenteric ischemia (small
bowel) from ischemic colitis are summarized in Table 3–4. 
G. Colonoscopy is the preferred test to evaluate ischemic colitis.
H. Plain radiographs rarely demonstrate free air (perforation) or
thumbprinting (specific for ischemia). 
I. CT scanning may demonstrate segmental circumferential wall
thickening (which is nonspecific) or be normal. 
J. Vascular studies are usually normal and not indicated except
in the unusual case of isolated right-sided ischemic colitis.
Treatment
A. Therapy is primarily supportive with bowel rest, IV hydra-
tion, and broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
B. Colonic infarction occurs in a small percentage of patients
(15–20%) and requires segmental resection. 
C. Indications for surgery include peritonitis, sepsis, free air on
plain radiographs, clinical deterioration (persistent fever,
increasing leukocytosis, lactic acidosis), or strictures. 
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Ms. R discussed her case with her primary care physician
and surgeon. Both agree that her symptom complex and
ultrasound suggest biliary colic. Furthermore, there was
no evidence of any of the alternative diagnoses. The nor-
mal lipase effectively rules out pancreatitis, and the
combination of no NSAIDs and a negative urea breath
test for H pylori makes PUD very unlikely. She also lacked
any risk factors for mesenteric ischemia. They recom-
mend surgery, which she schedules for the end of the
summer.
FOLLOW-UP
2
Ms. R returns 3 weeks later (and prior to her scheduled
surgery) in acute distress. She reports that her pain
began last evening, is in the same location as her previ-
ous bouts of pain, but unlike her previous episodes, the
pain has persisted. She is very uncomfortable. She
reports that her urine has changed color and is now quite
dark, “like tea.” In addition, she complains of “teeth chat-
tering” chills. On physical exam, Ms. R is febrile (38.5°C).
Her other vital signs are stable. Sclera are anicteric and
cardiac and pulmonary exams are all completely normal.
Abdominal exam reveals moderate tenderness in the epi-
gastrium and RUQ. Murphy sign is positive.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
This episode of abdominal pain raises several possibilities. The
first is that the current symptom complex is in some way related
to her known cholelithiasis. Although the persistent pain may sug-
gest cholecystitis (due to a stone lodged in the cystic duct), the
Table 3–4. Features that distinguish ischemic colitis from
acute mesenteric ischemia.
Ischemic Colitis
Acute Mesenteric Ischemia
Usually due to nonocclusive
Usually due to acute arterial 
decrease in colonic perfusion
occlusion of SMA or celiac artery
Precipitating cause often
Precipitating cause typical
not identified
(MI, atrial fibrillation etc)
Patients are usually
Patients appear severely ill
not severely ill
Abdominal pain usually mild
Abdominal pain usually severe
Abdominal tenderness
Abdominal tenderness not
usually present
prominent early
Hematochezia common
Hematochezia uncommon
until very late
Colonoscopy procedure of
Angiography indicated
choice, angiography not
usually indicated
MI, myocardial infarction; SMA, superior mesenteric artery.
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  35
dark urine is a pivotal clinical clue, which suggests a different com-
plication. One cause of dark urine is bilirubin in the urine (biliru-
binuria). Bilirubinuria only occurs in patients with conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia which, in turn, is due to either CBD obstruc-
tion or hepatitis. In our patient, the preexistent biliary colic, per-
sistent RUQ pain, and dark urine make the most likely diagnosis
CBD obstruction due to migration of a stone into the CBD
(choledocholithiasis) (Figure 3–2). On the other hand, in patients
with cholecystitis, only the cystic duct is obstructed. The CBD
remains open and therefore cholecystitis does not cause hyper-
bilirubinemia, dark urine, or significant increases in ALT (SGPT)
or AST (SGOT). Finally, Ms. R’s fever suggests that the CBD
obstruction has been complicated by ascending infection (ascend-
ing cholangitis), a life-threatening condition (Figure 3–4).
Dark urine suggests bilirubinuria and may precede
icterus.
Rigors (defined as visible shaking or teeth chattering
chills) suggests bacteremia and should increase the
suspicion of a life-threatening bacterial infection.
Other considerations include hepatitis or pancreatitis, which
may be caused by CBD obstruction. While hepatitis can cause
RUQ pain, hyperbilirubinemia, and bilirubinuria, it would also
require giving Ms. R. another unrelated diagnosis and is therefore
less likely. Table 3–5 lists the differential diagnosis.
2
Laboratory results include WBC 17,000/mcL (84%
neutrophils, 10% bands). Hct is 38%, lipase 17 units/L
(nl 11–65 units/L), alkaline phosphatase 467 units/L
(nl 30–120), bilirubin 4.2 mg/dL, conjugated bilirubin
3.0 mg/dL (nl 0 – 0.3), GGT 246 units/L (nl 8–35),
ALT, 100 units/L (nl 15–59). Ultrasound shows 
sludge and stones within the gallbladder. No CBD
dilatation or CBD stone is seen. Blood cultures are
ordered and you initiate broad-spectrum IV antibiotics
(ie, piperacillin/tazobactam).
Consider biliary colic
RUQ
ultrasound
(+)
Biliary colic
Consider
US, EUS,
MRCP, or ERCP
Consider
choledocolithiasis and
ascending cholangitis or
pancreatitis if the lipase
is elevated
Short episodes
No jaundice or fever
LFTs, lipase normal
Persistent pain
Fever may be present
Increased bilirubin,
lipase, or LFTs
Acute episodes of RUQ
or epigastric pain
Consider cholecystitis
RUQ
ultrasound
Gallstones with
gallbladder wall
thickening or edema
Nondiagnostic
HIDA scan
Nonvisualization
of gallbladder
Cholecystitis
Persistent pain
Fever may be present
Bilirubin, LFTs,
lipase normal
US, ultrasound; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; ERCP, endoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography
Figure 3–4. Diagnostic approach: biliary disease.
36 /  CHAPTER 3
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis of ascending cholangitis? If not,
what other information do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Choledocholithiasis &
Ascending Cholangitis
Textbook Presentation
Patients typically have some form of CBD obstruction (most often
from gallstones); RUQ pain, fever, and jaundice are presenting
symptoms.
Disease Highlights
A. 10–20% of patients with symptomatic gallstones have stones
within the CBD (choledocholithiasis).
B. Patients with choledocholithiasis may be asymptomatic. 
C. Complications of choledocholithiasis may be the presenting
manifestations: 
1. Obstruction and jaundice 
2. Fever, jaundice, and leukocytosis may be present due to
ascending infection from the duodenum (ascending
cholangitis).
3. Pancreatitis 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Ascending cholangitis
1. Clinical findings in patients with cholangitis include jaun-
dice, 79%; temperature ≥38.0 °C, 77%; and RUQ pain,
68%. In various studies 42–75% of patients had all three
(Charcot triad).
2. There is leukocytosis in 73% of patients and elevated
alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin in 91% and 87%,
respectively. 
3. 74% of patients were bacteremic
B. Choledocholithiasis
1. Any of the following suggests choledocholithiasis and war-
rants CBD evaluation (Table 3–6): 
a. Cholangitis
b. Jaundice 
c. Dilated CBD on ultrasound 
d. Elevated alkaline phosphatase 
e. Elevated amylase 
2. CBD stones are present in 5–8% of patients without any
of the aforementioned risk factors.
3. Transabdominal ultrasound is noninvasive but not consis-
tently sensitive for choledocholithiasis as opposed to its
performance in cholelithiasis (sensitivity 25–81%, speci-
ficity 88–91%). A dilated CBD is seen in only 25% of
patients. 
4. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP),
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP),
and endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) are highly accurate in
detecting CBD stones. These techniques share high sensi-
tivity (90–100%) and specificity (90–100%). 
a. ERCP
(1) Invasive procedure that allows direct cannulation
of CBD and relieves obstruction via simultaneous
stone extraction and sphincterotomy
(2) > 90% sensitive, 99% specific for diagnosis 
(3) Requires sedation  
(4) Complicated by pancreatitis in 1–5% of patients
(5) Preferred procedure in patients with a high pretest
probability of CBD stones particularly those with
jaundice and fever who need prompt relief of
obstruction
Table 3–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. R on follow-up.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Ascending
Right upper quadrant
Ultrasound
cholangitis
or epigastric pain
Endoscopic 
Dark urine
ultrasound
Fever
ERCP
Rigors
MRCP
CBC
Blood cultures
Active Alternatives-Most Common
Acute 
Right upper 
Ultrasound
cholecystitis 
quadrant pain
Fever
Pancreatitis
Alcohol abuse
Serum lipase
Gallstones
Hepatitis
Alcohol abuse 
Elevated ALT 
Right upper
and AST
quadrant pain
Viral serologies
Nausea
Dark urine
ERCP, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography; MRCP, magnetic reso-
nance cholangiopancreatography.
Table 3–6. Test characteristics for choledocholithiasis.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Cholangitis
11%
99%
18.3
0.93
Jaundice
36%
97%
10.1
0.69
Dilated CBD
42%
96%
6.9
0.77
on ultrasound
Elevated alkaline
57%
86%
2.6
0.65
phosphatase
Elevated
11%
95%
1.5
0.99
amylase 
CBD, common bile duct.
Modified, with permission, from Springer. Paul A. Diagnosis and treatment
of common bile duct stones. Surg Endosc. 1998;12:856–64.
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  37
(6) In patients less likely to have a CBD stone (ie, those
with cholelithiasis and isolated elevation in alkaline
phosphatase), a less invasive test (eg, MRCP or EUS)
is an appropriate initial study.  
b. MRCP
(1) Noninvasive scan visualizes CBD and adjacent
structures
(2) Highly accurate for CBD stones: 90–100% sensi-
tive, 88–100% specific
c. EUS is both sensitive (89–98%) and specific (94–98%)
for CBD stones. 
(1) One study reported that EUS was more sensitive
than ERCP (97% vs 67%). 
(2) EUS can be converted to ERCP in patients dis-
covered to have CBD stones. 
(3) A negative EUS or MRCP would obviate the need
for a more invasive ERCP.
d. CT scanning is only 75% sensitive for choledocholithi-
asis. Two studies suggest that multi-detector CT using
iotroxate (which is excreted in the biliary system) is
highly accurate for choledocholithiasis (85–96% sensi-
tive, 88–94% specific).
Treatment
A. IV broad-spectrum antibiotics and IV hydration
B. Decompression of the biliary system, preferably via ERCP, is vital. 
1. This should be performed emergently in patients with per-
sistent pain, hypotension, altered mental status, persistent
high fever, WBC ≥20,000/mcL, bilirubin ≥10 mg/dL and
electively in more stable patients. 
2. Transhepatic stent or surgical decompression is rarely used.
C. Cholecystectomy
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Neither dilation of the CBD nor CBD stone can be seen on ultra-
sound (but is only 25% sensitive). You still suspect choledo-
cholithiasis because of the jaundice and increased transaminases.
2
Twenty-four hours later, blood cultures are positive for
Escherichia coli (consistent with ascending cholangitis).
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, ascending cholangi-
tis? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Hepatitis
See Abnormal liver tests in Chapter 22, Jaundice and Abnormal
Liver Enzymes.
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Cholecystitis
Textbook Presentation
Typical symptoms of acute cholecystitis include persistent RUQ or
epigastric pain, fever, nausea, and vomiting.
Disease Highlights
A. Secondary to prolonged cystic duct obstruction (> 12 hours)
B. Persistent obstruction results in increasing gallbladder
inflammation and pain. Necrosis, infection, and gangrene
may occur.
C. Jaundice and marked elevation of liver enzymes are seen only
if the stone migrates into the CBD and causes obstruction.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. No clinical finding is sufficiently sensitive to rule out chole-
cystitis.
1. Fever: present in 35% of patients
2. Murphy sign
a. Sensitivity, 65%; specificity, 87%
b. LR+ = 5.0, LR−= 0.4
B. Laboratory findings
1. Leukocytosis (> 10,000/mcL) is present in 63% of
patients.
2. Cholecystitis does not typically cause significant increases
in lipase or LFTs. Such findings suggest complications of
pancreatitis and choledocholithiasis.
C. Ultrasound 
1. Findings that suggest acute cholecystitis include gall-
stones with gallbladder wall thickening, pericholecystic
fluid, sonographic Murphy sign, or gallbladder enlarge-
ment > 5 cm  
2. Sensitivity, 88%; specificity, 80%
3. LR+, 4.4; LR–, 0.15
D. Cholescintigraphy (HIDA) scans
1. Radioisotope is excreted by the liver into the biliary sys-
tem. In normal patients, the gallbladder concentrates the
isotope and is visualized.
2. Nonvisualization of the gallbladder suggests cystic duct
obstruction and is highly specific for acute cholecystitis
(97% sensitive, 90% specific).
3. Nonvisualization can also be seen in prolonged fasting,
hepatitis, and alcohol abuse.
4. Useful when the pretest probability is high and the ultra-
sound is nondiagnostic (ie, the ultrasound demonstrates
stones within the gallbladder) but no clear evidence of
cholecystitis is seen (eg, no stones within the cystic duct
nor evidence of gallbladder wall thickening or perichole-
cystic fluid).
5. Visualization of the gallbladder essentially excludes acute
cholecystitis.
E. Ultrasound is the test of choice for following reasons: 
1. Less expensive
2. Faster 
3. Avoids radiation  
4. Can image adjacent organs 
F. If ultrasound is normal, consider HIDA.
G. An algorithm to the diagnosis is shown in Figure 3–4.
Treatment
Patients with acute cholecystitis should be admitted, administered
parenteral antibiotics, and undergo cholecystectomy.
38 /  CHAPTER 3
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Pancreatitis
Textbook Presentation
Patients with acute pancreatitis often complain of a constant and
boring abdominal pain of moderate to severe intensity that devel-
ops in the epigastrium and may radiate to the back.  Associated
symptoms may include nausea, vomiting, low-grade fever, and
abdominal distention.  
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Alcohol abuse (typically binge drinking) and choledo-
cholithiasis cause 80% of acute pancreatitis cases.
2. 15–25% of cases are idiopathic (67% of patients with
idiopathic pancreatitis were found to have small gallstones
at ERCP)
3. Post ERCP 
4. Drugs commonly associated with pancreatitis include aza-
thioprine, didanosine (DDI), estrogens, furosemide,
hydrochlorothiazide, L-asparaginase, metronidazole, opi-
oids, pentamidine, sulfonamides, corticosteroids, tamox-
ifen, tetracycline, valproate, and many others.
5. Less common causes include trauma, marked hyper-
triglyceridemia (> 1000 mg/dL), hypercalcemia, ischemia,
HIV infection, other infection, trauma, pancreatic carci-
noma, pancreatic divisum and organ transplantation.
6. Regardless of the inciting event, trypsinogen is activated to
trypsin, which activates other pancreatic enzymes resulting
in pancreatic autodigestion and inflammation (which may
become systemic and lethal). Interleukins contribute to
the inflammation.
B. Complications may be local or systemic. Severe, potentially
fatal pancreatitis develops in about 20% of patients.
1. Local complications
a. Pancreatic pseudocyst
b. Pancreatic necrosis
c. Infections 
(1) Infected pancreatic pseudocyst (abscess)
(2) Infected pancreatic necrosis
(3) Ascending cholangitis (in patients with gallstone-
associated pancreatitis)
2. Systemic complications
a. Hyperglycemia
b. Hypocalcemia
c. Acute respiratory distress syndrome 
d. Acute renal failure 
e. Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
3. Death 
a. Usually occurs in patients with infected pancreatic
necrosis and in patients in whom multiple organ dys-
function develops.  
b. Several predictive scores have been developed including
the Ranson criteria and Apache II score. These are
fairly complex to use.
c. Hemoconcentration (Hct ≥50%) on admission pre-
dicts severe pancreatitis; LR+ 7.5 (vs 0.4 for patients
with Hct ( 45%). 
d. C-reactive protein > 150 mg/L at 48 hours can also
predict severe pancreatitis; sensitivity 85%, specificity
74%; LR+ 3.2, LR– 0.2 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical
1. Low-grade fevers (< 38.3°C) are common (60%). 
2. Pain may radiate to the back (50%) and may be exacer-
bated in the supine position. 
3. Nausea and vomiting are usually present (75%). 
4. Rebound is rare on presentation; guarding is common
(50%).
5. Periumbilical bruising (Cullen sign) is rare.
6. Flank bruising (Turner sign) is rare.
B. Laboratory studies
1. Lipase
a. 94% sensitive, 96% specific; LR+ = 23, LR– = .06
b. Remains elevated longer than serum amylase
c. Marked elevations suggest pancreatitis secondary to
gallstones.
2. Amylase
a. Less sensitive and specific than lipase
b. Should not be routinely ordered if lipase available
3. LFTs  
a. Useful in detecting gallstone-associated pancreatitis
(GAP); patients with GAP have high risk of recurrent
pancreatitis and require cholecystectomy.  
b. Studies suggest that significant elevations of the biliru-
bin, alkaline phosphatase, ALT, or AST predict GAP.
(These enzymes increase due to concomitant obstruc-
tion of the CBD.) 
(1) ALT or AST elevations > 100 suggest GAP (sensi-
tivity ≈55%, specificity ≈93%; LR+ 8–9)
(2) AST levels < 50 make GAP unlikely. (sensitivity
90%, specificity 68%; LR– 0.15)
(3) 10% of patients with GAP have normal levels of
alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, AST, and ALT.
4. Plain radiography is useful to rule out free air or SBO.
5. Imaging: A variety of imaging techniques can be used in
patients with acute pancreatitis. 
a. Transabdominal ultrasound is noninvasive and should
be performed in all patients with pancreatitis to deter-
mine if they have gallstones or CBD dilatation sug-
gesting GAP. 
b. CT scanning is 87–90% sensitive and 90–92% specific
for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis but insensitive
for determining whether or not patients have GAP. 
(1) Should be performed when the diagnosis is unclear
or complications are suspected (pseudocysts or
pancreatic necrosis) 
(2) Pancreatic necrosis should be suspected in patients
with severe pancreatitis, when signs of sepsis are
present, and in patients in patients who do not
improve in the first 72 hours.  
(3) IV contrast is required to demonstrate necrosis. 
c. Detecting GAP
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  39
(1) Neither transabdominal ultrasound nor CT are
sensitive at detecting choledocholithiasis (21% and
40% respectively). 
(2) MRCP is highly accurate for choledocholithiasis
(80–94% sensitive) as are EUS and ERCP (≈ 98%
sensitive) 
(3) ERCP can relieve CBD obstruction and is recom-
mended in patients with persistent obstruction or
cholangitis. Some authorities also recommend
ERCP for patients with severe pancreatitis. ERCP
can precipitate pancreatitis and is therefore not rec-
ommended for all patients with GAP. ERCP with
sphincterotomy can be therapeutic but is invasive.
(4) Figure 3–5 outlines an approach to GAP.
Treatment
A. Vital signs, orthostatic BPs, and urinary output should be
carefully monitored to assess intravascular volume.
B. IV fluid is critical to maintain appropriate BP and urinary
output (> 0.5 mL/kg/h)
C. No oral intake
D. Parenteral pain medication
E. Nasogastric (NG) tube if recurrent vomiting
F. ICU admission for severe pancreatitis
G. Prophylactic antibiotics for patients with pancreatic necrosis
are controversial.
H. If infection is suspected (due to increasing fever, leukocytosis
or deterioration) evaluate with fine-needle aspiration and cul-
ture. If infection is confirmed, broad-spectrum antibiotics
should be administered and surgical debridement considered.
I. ERCP and sphincterotomy (see above) 
J. Patients with GAP are at high risk for recurrent pancreatitis
(≈30%), cholangitis, and biliary colic. Cholecystectomy
should be performed after recovery and prior to discharge to
prevent recurrences. Intraoperative cholangiogram or ERCP
is required to ensure that the CBD is clear of stones.  
Acute pancreatitis
History: alcohol use, biliary colic
Transabdominal ultrasound
Enzymes: Lipase, AST, ALT, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin
Cholangitis,
Biliary obstruction or
Severe GAP
U/S shows cholelithiasis
GAP
Likely GAP
Consider
EUS or MRCP
Conservative management
Elective cholecystectomy with intraperative cholangiogram
or ERCP
Alcoholic pancreatitis
U/S shows dilated CBD
U/S normal
Elevated ALT or AST
U/S normal, ALT normal,
Alcohol abuse
No
(+)
Urgent ERCP with
sphincterotomy
Yes
Figure 3–5. Evaluation of pancreatitis.
40 /  CHAPTER 3
K. Alcohol abstinence
L. Enteral feeding via nasoenteric feeding tubes, preferably
placed in the jejunum, is recommended in patients with
severe or complicated pancreatitis.
Alternative Diagnosis: Chronic Pancreatitis
See Chapter 27, Involuntary Weight Loss.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
An ERCP demonstrates multiple small stones within the
CBD, which are extracted. Ms. R underwent cholecystec-
tomy and recovered without incident.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Mr. J is a 63-year-old man with severe abdominal pain for
48 hours. The pain is periumbilical with severe crampy
exacerbations that last for several minutes and then
subside. He notes loud intestinal noises (borborygmi)
during the periods of increased pain. The pain is associ-
ated with nausea and vomiting. He reports decreased
appetite with no oral intake in the last 48 hours.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. J’s severe crampy abdominal pain suggests some type of vis-
ceral obstruction. The syndromes associated with pain of this
quality include ureteral obstruction secondary to kidney stones,
biliary obstruction, or intestinal obstruction (large or small
bowel). The associated nausea and vomiting can be seen with any
of those diseases. However, the loud intestinal sounds associated
with exacerbations of the pain suggest some form of intestinal
obstruction. In addition, the periumbilical location is more sug-
gestive of intestinal obstruction than renal or biliary colic. 
Table 3–7 lists the differential diagnoses for Mr. J. 
3
Three weeks ago, Mr. J noted a small amount of blood on
the stool. He reports no other change in bowel habits
until 4 days ago. Since that time, he has been consti-
pated and has not passed stool or flatus. He has no
prior history of intra-abdominal surgeries, hernias, or
diverticulitis. He reports no history of flank pain, groin
pain, or hematuria. He has no history of gallstones and
has not noticed any tea-colored urine. On physical exam,
he is intermittently very uncomfortable with episodes of
severe diffuse cramping pain. Vital signs reveal orthosta-
tic hypotension: supine BP, 110/75 mm Hg; pulse, 90 bpm;
upright BP, 85/50 mm Hg; pulse, 125 bpm; temperature,
37.0°C; RR, 18 breaths per minute. He is anicteric.
Cardiac and lung exams are unremarkable. Abdominal
exam reveals prominent distention. Bowel sounds show
intermittent rushes. He has mild diffuse tenderness to
exam without rebound or guarding. Stool is brown and
heme positive.
The constipation, absence of flatus, abdominal distention, and
rushing bowel sounds further increase the suspicion of bowel
obstruction. Most small bowel obstructions (SBO) are due to
adhesions from prior surgery. Mr. J’s negative surgical history
makes this unlikely. However, the hematochezia raises the possi-
bility of a malignant obstruction. The orthostatic hypotension
suggests significant dehydration.
3
Laboratory findings are WBC 10,000/mcL (70% neu-
trophils, 0% bands); Hct, 41%. Electrolytes: Na, 141; K,
3.0; HCO3, 32; Cl, 99; BUN, 45; Creatinine 1.0 mg/dL. An
abdominal upright radiograph is shown Figure 3–6.
Table 3–7. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. J.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Bowel
Inability to pass stool
Abdominal
obstruction
or flatus
radiographs
Nausea, vomiting 
CT scan
Prior abdominal surgery
or altered bowel habits,
Hematochezia,
Abdominal distention,
hyperactive bowel
sounds (with tinkling)
or hypoactive bowel
sounds
Prior abdominal surgery
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Biliary colic 
Episodic, crampy pain
Ultrasound 
Dark urine 
Renal colic
Flank or groin pain
Urinalysis
Hematuria
Renal CT scan
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  41
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Large Bowel
Obstruction (LBO)
Textbook Presentation
Bowel obstructions present with severe crampy abdominal pain
that is accentuated in waves, which the patient finds incapacitat-
ing. Vomiting is common. The pain is often diffuse and poorly
localized. Initially, the patient may have several bowel movements
as the bowel distal to the obstruction is emptied. Bowel sounds are
hyperactive early in the course. Abdominal distention is often
present. (Distention is less marked in proximal SBOs.) At first, the
pain is intermittent; later, the pain often becomes more constant,
bowel sounds may diminish and become absent, constipation pro-
gresses and the patient becomes unable to pass flatus. If bowel
infarction occurs, peritoneal findings may be seen.
In patients with abdominal pain, the absence of
bowel movements or flatus suggests bowel
obstruction.
Disease Highlights
Etiology and related prevalence is as follows:
1. Cancer, 53%
2. Sigmoid or cecal volvulus, 17%
3. Diverticular disease, 12%
4. Extrinsic compression from metastatic cancer, 6%
5. Other, 12% (adhesions rarely cause LBO)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam (Table 3–8)
1. None of the expected clinical findings are very sensitive
a. Vomiting, 75%
b. Abdominal distention, 63%
2. Certain findings are fairly specific
a. Constipation, 95%; LR+, 8.8
FP
b. Prior abdominal surgery, 94%; LR+, 11.5
c. Abdominal distention, 89%; LR+, 5.7
3. Certain combinations are insensitive (27–48%) but highly
specific.
FP
a. Distention associated with any of the following highly
suggestive (LR+ ≈10): increased bowel sounds, vomit-
ing, constipation, or prior surgery
FP
b. Increased bowel sounds with prior surgery or vomiting
also very suggestive of obstruction (LR+ of 11 and 8,
respectively)
B. A CBC and electrolytes should be obtained: Anion gap acido-
sis suggests bowel infarction or sepsis.
Marked leukocytosis, left shift or anion gap acido-
sis in a patient with bowel obstruction is a late find-
ing and suggests bowel infarction.
C. Plain radiography may show air-fluid levels and distention of
large bowel (> 6 cm).
1. 84% sensitive, 72% specific for presence of LBO (not
etiology)
2. Small bowel distention also occurs if ileocecal valve is
incompetent.
D. Barium enema (water soluble) or colonoscopy
1. Barium enema is highly accurate for LBO. 
Figure 3–6. Plain radiography reveals grossly distended
ascending colon, multiple air-fluid levels and an abrupt termina-
tion of air in the transverse colon (arrow) suggestive of large
bowel obstruction.
Table 3–8. Test characteristics for predicting bowel
obstruction.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR–
Visible peristalsis
6%
99.7%
20
0.94
Prior abdominal surgery
69%
94%
11.5
0.33
Constipation
44%
95%
8.8
0.59
Abdominal distention
63%
89%
5.7
0.42
Increased bowel sounds
40%
89%
3.6
0.67
Reduced bowel sounds
23%
93%
3.3
0.83
Colicky pain
31%
89%
2.8
0.78
Vomiting
75%
65%
2.1
0.38
LR, likelihood ratio.
Modified, with permission, from Taylor & Francis Ltd. Böhmer H. Simple
Data from History and Physical Examination Help to Exclude Bowel Obstruc-
tion and to Avoid Radiographic Studies in Patients with Acute Abdominal
Pain. http://www.tandf.co.UK/journals.
42 /  CHAPTER 3
a. 96% sensitive, 98% specific 
b. LR+ 48, LR– 0.04
2. Can determine etiology preoperatively (if patient stable)
3. Can exclude acute colonic pseudo-obstruction (distention
of the cecum and colon without mechanical obstruction)
4. Colonoscopy can decompress pseudo-obstruction and
prevent cecal perforation.
E. CT scan is also accurate in the diagnosis of LBO.
1. 91% sensitive, 91% specific
2. LR+ 10.1, LR– 0.1 
Treatment of LBO
A. Aggressive rehydration and monitoring of urinary output is
vital.
B. Broad-spectrum antibiotics advised: 39% of patients have
microorganisms in the mesenteric nodes
C. Surgery
D. For patients with sigmoid volvulus, and no evidence of infarc-
tion, sigmoidoscopy allows decompression and elective sur-
gery at a later date to prevent recurrence.
1. Emergent indications: perforation or ischemia
2. Nonemergent indications: increasing distention, failure to
resolve
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
After reviewing the plain films, you order a barium enema.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, large bowel obstruc-
tion? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: SBO
Textbook Presentation
The presentation is similar to that for LBO with the exception
that more patients have a history of prior abdominal surgery.
Disease Highlights
A. Bowel obstruction accounts for 4% of patients with abdomi-
nal pain.
B. SBO accounts for 80% of all bowel obstructions.
C. Etiology
1. Adhesions present in 70% of cases
a. Usually postsurgical
b. 93% of patients with prior abdominal surgery have
adhesions
c. Up to 14% of patients with prior surgery require read-
mission for adhesions over the next 10 years.
2. Malignant tumor 10–20%; usually metastatic. 39% of
SBOs in patients with a prior malignancy are due to adhe-
sions or benign causes. 
3. Hernia (ventral, inguinal, or internal) 10%
4. IBD (with stricture) 5%
5. Radiation
6. Less common causes of SBO include gallstones, bezoars,
and intussusception.
D. SBOs may be partial or complete. 
1. Complete SBO
a. 20–40% progress to strangulation and infarction
b. Clinical signs do not allow for identification of stran-
gulation prior to infarction: Fever, leukocytosis, and
metabolic acidosis are late signs of strangulation and
suggest infarction.
c. 50–75% of patients admitted for SBO require surgery
2. Partial SBO
a. Rarely progresses to strangulation or infarction
b. Characterized by continuing ability to pass stool or fla-
tus (> 6–12 hours after symptom onset) or passage of
contrast into cecum
c. Resolves spontaneously (without surgery) in 60–85%
of patients
d. Enteroclysis (an air-contrast study of the small bowel)
is test of choice.
e. CT scan only 48% sensitive for partial SBO
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Ideally, tests for SBO should identify obstruction and
ischemia or infarction, if present (since ischemia and infarc-
tion are indications for emergent surgery rather than further
observation.) Unfortunately, even tests that successfully pre-
dict SBO do not reliably determine whether there is ischemia
and infarction. 
B. See test characteristics of history and physical exam under
LBO.
C. WBC may be normal even in presence of ischemia.
D. Plain radiographs may show ≥two air-fluid levels or dilated
loops of bowel proximal to obstruction (> 2.5 cm diameter of
small bowel).
1. Sensitivity for obstruction 59–93%, specificity 83%
2. Rarely determines etiology
3. Complete obstruction is unlikely in patients with air in
the colon or rectum 
E. Ultrasound is seldom used for this indication but may be use-
ful in pregnant patients.
F. CT scanning
1. Moderately sensitive at determining high-grade obstruc-
tion (80–93%). 
a. Obstruction is suggested by a transition point between
bowel proximal to the obstruction, which is dilated,
and bowel distal to the obstruction, which is collapsed. 
b. CT scanning should be performed prior to NG suction,
which may decompress the proximal small bowel and
thereby decreases the sensitivity of the CT scan for SBO. 
2. May delineate etiology of obstruction
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  43
3. Test of choice to diagnose SBO (not ischemia)
4. Not reliably sensitive at determining the presence of
ischemia and infarction (and the need for immediate sur-
gery). Different studies have reported sensitivities ranging
from 15% to 100% (specificity 85–94%). 
The absence of CT signs of ischemia in patients
with SBO does not in fact rule out ischemia.
G. Small bowel series
1. Accurate in the diagnosis of SBO and useful to predict
nonoperative resolution; 45–96% sensitive, 92–96% spe-
cific. (Spontaneous resolution likely in patients in whom
contrast reaches the colon) 
2. Unlike CT scanning, small bowel series cannot delineate
etiology of SBO or demonstrate ischemic changes.
3. Typically used when CT scanning not diagnostic and con-
cern for SBO remains
4. Water-soluble contrast and barium have been used
a. Barium is superior because it is not diluted by intralu-
minal water.
b. Barium can become inspissated in the colon and is con-
traindicated in LBO.
Treatment
A. Fluid resuscitation 
1. Intravascular dehydration is often prominent due to
decreased oral intake, vomiting, and third spacing of fluid
within the bowel. 
2. Monitor urinary output carefully.
B. Careful, frequent observation and repeated physical exam
over the first 12–24 hours 
C. NG suction
D. Broad-spectrum antibiotics (59% of patients have bacterial
translocation to mesenteric lymph nodes)
E. Frequent plain radiographs and CBC
F. Indications for surgery include any of the following
1. Signs of ischemia (increased pain, fever, tenderness, peri-
toneal findings, acidosis, or worsening leukocytosis)
2. CT findings of infarction
3. SBO secondary to hernia
4. SBO clearly not secondary to adhesion (no prior surgery)
5. Some clinicians recommend surgery when bowel obstruc-
tion fails to resolve in 24 hours. Others suggest a small
bowel study.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
The barium enema reveals an obstructive apple core
lesion in the sigmoid colon suggestive of carcinoma of the
colon. Mr. J underwent surgical exploration, which con-
firmed an obstructing colonic mass. The mass was
resected and a colostomy created. Pathologic evaluation
revealed adenocarcinoma of the colon.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 4
Mr. L is a 65-year-old man who arrives in the emergency
department complaining of 1 hour of excruciating constant
abdominal pain radiating to his flank. He has suffered 1
episode of vomiting and feels light headed. The emesis was
yellow. He has moved his bowels once this morning. There is
no change in his bowel habits, melena, or hematochezia.
Nothing seems to make the pain better or worse. He was
without any pain until this morning. His past medical his-
tory is remarkable for hypertension and tobacco use. On
physical exam, he is diaphoretic and in obvious acute dis-
tress. Vital signs are BP, 110/65 mm Hg; pulse, 90 bpm;
temperature, 37.0°C; RR, 20 breaths per minute. HEENT,
cardiac, and pulmonary exams are all within normal limits.
Abdominal exam reveals moderate diffuse tenderness,
without rebound or guarding. Bowel sounds are present and
hypoactive. Stool is guaiac negative.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Given Mr. L’s extreme distress, life-threatening diagnoses must be
considered carefully. The location of the pain is not terribly help-
ful in this case although the radiation of the pain to the flank raises
the possibilities of renal colic, biliary colic, pancreatitis, or AAA.
Clearly, AAA is a must not miss diagnosis. The acuity of the pain
is consistent with renal colic, biliary colic, pancreatitis, AAA, or
bowel obstruction (although the rapidity is somewhat unusual for
bowel obstruction). Diverticular rupture can result in severe sud-
den onset of pain, although the pain is more often in the left lower
quadrant (LLQ) than diffuse. PUD rarely causes such severe pain
unless associated with perforation, and the abdominal exam does
not suggest peritonitis. 
Table 3–9 lists the differential diagnoses for Mr. L.
4
Mr. L has no history of renal stones or hematuria, gall-
stones, dark urine, or light stools. He has never had this
pain before. He does not drink alcohol. On reexamination,
orthostatic maneuvers reveal profound orthostatic
hypotension. Supine BP and pulse were 110/65 mm Hg
and 90 bpm. Upon standing his BP falls to 65/40 mm Hg 
44 /  CHAPTER 3
with a pulse of 140 bpm. He remains afebrile. Again, you
find that he lacks rebound or guarding and is not partic-
ularly tender in the LLQ. He has moderate flank and back
tenderness to percussion. His abdominal aorta cannot
be palpated due to his abdominal girth. Lower extremity
pulses are intact. Plain abdominal radiographs do not
demonstrate free air.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
The most dramatic and important physical finding is the presence
of profound orthostatic hypotension. This suggests significant
intravascular depletion and is a pivotal clinical clue. It is unlikely
that dehydration is responsible for the profound orthostasis given
the absence of significant emesis, diarrhea, or prolonged period of
no oral intake. Therefore, the profound orthostasis suggests acute
blood loss; either within the GI tract or intra-peritoneal hemor-
rhage. Large volume GI hemorrhage always exits the bowel
quickly resulting in either hematemesis, melena, or hematochezia
and is rarely subtle. Therefore, you are more concerned about
intra-peritoneal hemorrhage. Causes of massive intra-peritoneal
hemorrhage include rupture of an AAA, splenic rupture, or rup-
ture of an ectopic pregnancy. The patient’s history is most sugges-
tive of AAA rupture. You revise your leading diagnosis to AAA
rupture. You call for a stat vascular surgery consult.
Orthostatic hypotension is always important. It signif-
icantly influences the differential diagnosis and the
diagnostic and management decisions, and it may be
marked despite a normal supine BP and pulse.
Leading Hypothesis: AAA
Textbook Presentation
Classically, patients are men with a history of hypertension who
have the triad of severe abdominal pain, a pulsatile abdominal
mass, and hypotension.
Disease Highlights
A. 10,000 deaths per year in United States
B. Misdiagnosis (most commonly renal colic) occurs in 16% of
cases.
C. Subtypes of AAA
1. Asymptomatic: Rupture rates rise as aneurysm increases in
diameter
a. AAA 5.5–6.5 cm: 10%/y
b. AAA 6.5–7.0 cm: 20%/y
c. AAA > 7 cm: 30%/y
2. Ruptured
a. Hypotension is a late finding, and palpable mass is
often not present.
b. Mortality with rupture is 70–90%.
c. Syncope may be present.
d. Patient may live for days if rupture is contained.
e. Rupture into the duodenum is a rare complication, is
more common in patients with prior AAA graft, and
may result in GI bleeding over weeks.
3. Symptomatic, contained
a. Although rarely considered, some patients present non-
emergently with symptomatic contained rupture of the
abdominal aorta. Symptoms are primarily secondary to
retroperitoneal hemorrhage and are occasionally pres-
ent for weeks or even months.
b. Manifestations include
(1) Abdominal pain 83%
(2) Flank or back pain 61%
(3) Syncope 26%
(4) Abdominal mass on careful exam 52% (only 18%
had abdominal mass noted on routine abdominal
exam)
(5) Hypotension or orthostasis 48%
(6) Leukocytosis (> 11,000/mcL) 70%
(7) Anemia (unusual)
4. Inflammatory AAA
a. Comprise about 5–10% of AAAs and usually occurs at
a slightly younger age.
b. Distinguishing characteristic is marked inflammation
of aortic adventia
c. Back pain or abdominal pain is usual presentation
(80% of patients); rupture is rarely presenting manifes-
tation.
d. Symptoms of inflammation (fever, weight loss) present
in 20–50% of patients)
e. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate elevated in 40–90% of
cases.
f. CT or MRI reveal the aneurysm and marked thickening
of the aortic wall. Periaortic fat stranding may be seen. 
Table 3–9. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. L.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Renal colic
Flank pain
Urinalysis
Radiation to groin
Renal CT 
Hematuria  
Costovertebral angle
tenderness
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Biliary colic
Episodic, crampy pain
Ultrasound
Dark urine
Diverticulitis
Left lower quadrant
CT scan
pain (usually)
Diarrhea
Fever
Pancreatitis
Alcohol abuse
Serum lipase
Gallstones
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
AAA 
Orthostatic hypotension
Abdominal
Pulsatile abdominal mass
CT scan
Decreased lower extremity
pulses
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  45
g. Therapy includes smoking cessation and repair of
aneurysms ≥5.5 cm. Immunosuppressants (ie, corti-
costeroids) have been used. 
D. Risk factors
1. Smoking is the most significant risk factor (OR 5).
2. Men are affected 4 to 5 times more often than women.
3. Family history of AAA (OR 4.3)
4. Increased age
5. Hypertension (OR 1.2)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Physical exam is not sufficiently sensitive to rule out AAA.
B. Bruits do not contribute to diagnosis.
C. Sensitivity of focused exam for asymptomatic AAA is poor
overall (39%) and only 76% among patients with large AAA
(≥5 cm.) The sensitivity of the physical exam is less in obese
patients. 
D. Sensitivity of abdominal exam in symptomatic AAA
1. Abdominal pain, distention, and rupture all limit sensitivity.
2. Distention was reported in 52–100% in different series.
3. Palpable mass was found in 18%.
A palpable mass is unusual in patients with a rup-
tured AAA.
E. Laboratory and radiologic tests
1. Bedside emergency ultrasound has been demonstrated to be
highly accurate; sensitivity 96–100%, specificity 98–100%.
2. For screening, ultrasound is preferred; sensitivity 95%,
specificity 100%.
3. Preoperative evaluation prior to repair of asymptomatic AAA
may include CT scanning, CT angiography, or aortography. 
Treatment
A. For ruptured AAA, proceed directly to the operating room.
B. Asymptomatic AAA
1. Screening men aged 65–75 years with one-time ultra-
sound has been demonstrated to reduce mortality and be
cost effective. 
2. Although the relative risk reduction was 43%, the absolute
reduction in AAA mortality is small (0.14%).
3. Operative mortality for elective repair was 3.1–4.6% and
substantial operative morbidity occurs in 32% of patients. 
4. The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USP-
STF) recommends one-time screening with ultrasound for
AAA in men 65 to 75 years old who have ever smoked
cigarettes.
a. Repair is recommended when an aneurysm is ≥5.5 cm
diameter or is tender or has increased in size by ≥1 cm
in 1 year.
(1) Options include open surgical repair versus
endovascular stent placement. 
(2) 30-day mortality is lower with stent placement
than open repair (1.7 vs 4.7%) but reinterventions
are more common with stent placement.  
b. For AAA 4.0–5.4 cm, monitor every 6 months with
ultrasonography. One report suggested increasing the
frequency to every 3 months in patients with aneurysms
≥5.0 cm.
5. Medical management includes smoking cessation, statin
therapy, and blood pressure control.  
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
4
Further evaluation at this point depends on the index of
suspicion. If AAA is very likely and the patient is unsta-
ble, many vascular surgeons proceed directly to the oper-
ating room without further studies in order to avoid the
potential lethal delay of obtaining a CT scan. Bedside
ultrasonography is a useful option if available. If AAA is
less likely and the patient is stable, CT scanning is appro-
priate.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, AAA? Have you ruled
out the active alternatives? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Nephrolithiasis
Textbook Presentation
Patients typically experience rapid onset of excruciating back and
flank pain, which may radiate to the abdomen or groin. The
intensity of the pain is often dramatic as patients writhe and move
about constantly in an unsuccessful attempt to get comfortable.
The pain may be associated with nausea, vomiting, or dysuria. 
Abdominal tenderness is unusual in patients with
nephrolithiasis and should raise the possibility of
other diagnoses.
Disease Highlights
A. Incidence: Symptomatic stones develop in 5% of people in
the United States
1. 50% recurrence at 10 years
2. Men affected 2 to 3 times more often than women
3. Positive family history (RR 2.6)
B. Etiology
1. Caoxalate stones 75%
2. Calcium phosphate stones (CAPO4) 5%
3. Uric acid stones 5–10%
4. Struvite stones (MgNH4PO4) 5–15%
5. Other: cystine and indinavir stones
C. Pathophysiology
1. Stones form when the concentration of salts (ie, calcium,
oxalate, or uric acid) becomes supersaturated in the urine
resulting in precipitation and crystallization. 
46 /  CHAPTER 3
2. Supersaturation is secondary to a combination of increased
urinary salt excretion combined with inadequate diluting
urinary volume. Numerous mechanisms can contribute to
an increase in urinary mineral excretion including:
a. Calcium: idiopathic hypercalcuria, primary hyper-
parathyroidism, immobilization, excessive sodium
intake (which increases calcium excretion), systemic
acidosis, hypocitraturia (a factor in 20–60% of calcium
stones), and excessive vitamin D supplementation
b. Uric acid: Excessive dietary purines, myeloproliferative
disorders, uricosuric agents (for the treatment of gout),
and metabolic syndrome. Low urine pH also con-
tributes to uric acid stone formation. Hyperuricosuria
can lead to uric acid stones or calcium stones due to
heterogeneous ossification.  
c. Oxalate: Causes include excessive dietary oxalates
(rhubarb, spinach, chocolate, nuts, vitamin C) and
increased oxalate absorption (fat malabsorption com-
plexes calcium and leads to increased oxalate absorp-
tion and excretion).
3. In some patients, a decrease in urinary stone inhibitors
(urinary citrate) also contribute to stone formation. 
4. Infection with urea splitting organisms (ie, Proteus) plays a
key role in the formation of struvite stones (MgNH4PO4).
5. Renal colic develops when stones dislodge from the kidney
and obstruct urinary flow.
D. Complications
1. Ureteral obstruction
2. Pyelonephritis
3. Sepsis
4. Renal failure is rare, occurring in patients with bilateral
obstruction or obstruction of a solitary functioning kidney.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The evaluation is directed at establishing the diagnosis of
nephrolithiasis and its underlying etiology so that measures to
prevent its recurrence can be implemented. 
B. Establishing the diagnosis
1. Hematuria is present in 80% of patients, LR−is 0.57. 
The absence of hematuria does not rule out
nephrolithiasis.
2. Radiographs (kidneys, ureters, bladder [KUB]) or ultra-
sound are not sufficiently sensitive to rule out nephrolithi-
asis (sensitivity 29–68% and 32–57%, respectively).
3. Noncontrast helical renal CT is the test of choice.
a. Sensitivity 95%; specificity 98% 
b. LR+, 48; LR−, 0.05  
c. Importantly, CT scan revealed alternative diagnoses in
33% of patients clinically diagnosed with a first episode
of nephrolithiasis. 
C. Evaluation of documented nephrolithiasis 
1. All patients should have a urinalysis and culture and basic
serum chemistries, including several measurements of
serum calcium. 
2. A more comprehensive evaluation, including several 24-
hour urine specimens for analysis of calcium, oxalate, uric
acid, sodium, creatinine and citrate as well as submission
of retrieved stones for chemical analysis, is recommended
for patients with recurrent stones. Some experts recom-
mend this for patients with their first stone. 
Treatment
A. Pain control
1. NSAIDS
a. Treat pain and diminish spasm
b. Create less dependence than opioids
c. To be avoided 3 days before lithotripsy due to antiplatelet
effects
2. Opioids
B. Hydration (oral if tolerated, otherwise IV)
C. Sepsis or renal failure
1. Necessitate emergent drainage (via percutaneous nephros-
tomy tube or ureteral stent)
2. For sepsis, broad-spectrum IV antibiotics to cover gram-neg-
ative organisms and enterococcus should be administered
D. Stone passage
1. Nifedipine and tamsulosin have been demonstrated to sig-
nificantly increase the likelihood of stone passage by 65%.
2. Lithotripsy or ureteroscopy are used to remove persistent
ureteral stones. 
E. Secondary prevention
1. General measures include increasing fluid intake (≥2 L/d),
and moderating sodium and protein intake. 
2. More specific management (ie, dietary modification) is
complex and depends on the underlying etiology of the
patient’s nephrolithiasis.
3. Thiazide diuretics decrease urinary calcium excretion (espe-
cially when combined with potassium supplementation)
and can be useful in patients with recurrent nephrolithiasis
and hypercalciuria.
4. Allopurinol can be useful in patients with nephrolithiasis
and hyperuricosuria.  
Alternative Diagnosis: Diverticulitis
Textbook Presentation
Patients typically complain of a constant gradually increasing LLQ
abdominal pain, usually present for several days. Fever and diar-
rhea or constipation are often present. Guarding and rebound may
be seen.
Disease Highlights
A. Diverticula are outpouchings of the colonic wall that may be
asymptomatic (diverticulosis), become inflamed (diverticuli-
tis), or hemorrhage. 
B. Diverticulosis 
1. Develops in 5–10% of patients aged > 45 years, 50% in
persons aged > 60 years, and 80% in those aged > 85 years. 
2. Low-fiber diets are believed to cause diverticula by decreas-
ing stool bulk, resulting in increased intraluminal pressure
creating diverticula as the mucosa and submucosa herniate
ABDOMINAL PAIN /  47
through weakness in the colonic wall where vessels pene-
trate.
C. Diverticulitis
1. Develops secondary to microscopic or frank perforation of
diverticula. 
2. 85–95% of diverticulitis occurs in sigmoid or descending
colon
3. Complications of diverticulitis
a. Abscess
b. Peritonitis
c. Sepsis
d. Colonic obstruction
e. Fistula formation (colovesicular fistula most common)
4. Simultaneous diverticular hemorrhage and diverticulitis
are unusual; diverticular hemorrhage is discussed in
Chapter 17, GI Bleeding.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis (Diverticulitis)
A. Neither fever nor leukocytosis are very sensitive for divertic-
ulitis or diverticular abscess.
1. In patients with uncomplicated diverticulitis, only 45%
had temperature of ≥38.0°C or WBC > 11,000/mcL.
2. In patients with diverticular abscess, only 64% of patients
had temperature of ≥38.0°C and 62% had WBC >
11,000/mcL.  
B. Plain radiographs may demonstrate free air or obstruction.
C. CT scan is test of choice.
1. May demonstrate diverticula, thickened bowel wall, peri-
colonic fat stranding, or abscess formation
2. 93-97% sensitive 
3. Colon cancer can lead to bowel wall thickening and per-
foration and be difficult to distinguish from diverticulitis.
D. Acute colonoscopy is not advised due to concern of perforation.
Treatment
A. Outpatient management is appropriate for patients with a
mild attack (ie, patients without marked fever or marked
leukocytosis, pain manageable with oral analgesics, tolerating
oral intake) and without significant comorbidities, immuno-
compromise, or advanced age.
1. Ciprofloxacin and metronidazole for 7–10 days
2. Liquid diet
3. High-fiber diet after attack resolves
4. Follow-up colonoscopy (see below)
B. Moderate to severe attack (unable to tolerate oral intake, more
severe pain) necessitates inpatient treatment.
1. Broad-spectrum IV antibiotics
2. No oral intake
3. CT guided drainage for abscesses > 5 cm
4. Emergent surgery is recommended in patients with 
a. Frank peritonitis
b. Uncontrolled sepsis 
c. Clinical deterioration despite medical management
d. Obstruction or large abscesses that cannot be drained
or are contaminated with frank fecal contents
5. The threshold for surgery should be lower in immuno-
compromised patients.
6. High-fiber diet once the attack has resolved
7. Follow-up colonoscopy is advised 4–6 weeks after resolu-
tion of symptoms to exclude carcinoma in patients without
a recent colonoscopy. (Colon cancer is found in 17% of
patients thought to have complicated diverticular disease.)
CASE RESOLUTION
4
The surgical resident evaluates the patient and agrees
with your concern about an AAA. He orders a stat CT
scan and contacts his attending. The attending immedi-
ately evaluates the patient and redirects the patient
directly to the operating room bypassing the CT scan.
Surgery reveals a leaking AAA that ruptures during the
surgery. The aorta is cross clamped, repaired, and the
patient is stabilized.
REFERENCES
Andersson RE, Hugander AP, Ghazi SH et al. Diagnostic value of disease history,
clinical presentation, and inflammatory parameters of appendicitis. World J
Surg. 1999;23(2):133–40.
Cardall T, Glasser J, Guss DA. Clinical value of the total white blood cell count
and temperature in the evaluation of patients with suspected appendicitis.
Acad Emerg Med. 2004;11(10):1021–7.
Dholakia K, Pitchumoni CS, Agarwal N. How often are liver function tests nor-
mal in acute biliary pancreatitis? J Clin Gastroenterol. 2004;38(1):81–3.
Frossard JL, Steer ML, Pastor CM. Acute pancreatitis. Lancet. 2008;371(9607):
143–52.
Gan SI, Romagnuolo J. Admission hematocrit: a simple, useful and early predic-
tor of severe pancreatitis. Dig Dis Sci. 2004;49(11-12):1946–52.
Gurleyik G, Emir S, Kilicoglu G, Arman A, Saglam A. Computed tomography
severity index, APACHE II score, and serum CRP concentration for pre-
dicting the severity of acute pancreatitis. JOP. 2005;6(6):562–7.
Ha M, MacDonald RD. Impact of CT scan in patients with first episode of sus-
pected nephrolithiasis. J Emerg Med. 2004;27(3):225–31.
Huguier M, Barrier A, Boelle PY, Houry S, Lacaine F. Ischemic colitis. Am J Surg.
2006;192(5):679–84.
Jacobs DO. Clinical practice. Diverticulitis. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(20):2057–66.
Lederle FA, Simel DL. The rational clinical examination. Does this patient have
abdominal aortic aneurysm? JAMA. 1999;281(1):77–82.
Liu CL, Fan ST, Lo CM et al. Clinico-biochemical prediction of biliary cause of
acute pancreatitis in the era of endoscopic ultrasonography. Aliment Phar-
macol Ther. 2005;22(5):423–31.
Mayer EA. Clinical practice. Irritable bowel syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(16):
1692–9.
Park CJ, Jang MK, Shin WG et al. Can we predict the development of ischemic
colitis among patients with lower abdominal pain? Dis Colon Rectum.
2007;50(2):232–8.
Rao PM, Rhea JT, Novelline RA, Mostafavi AA, McCabe CJ. Effect of computed
tomography of the appendix on treatment of patients and use of hospital
resources. N Engl J Med. 1998;338(3):141–6.
Shea JA, Berlin JA, Escarce JJ et al. Revised estimates of diagnostic test sensitivity
and specificity in suspected biliary tract disease. Arch Intern Med.
1994;154(22):2573–81.
Snyder BK, Hayden SR. Accuracy of leukocyte count in the diagnosis of acute
appendicitis. Ann Emerg Med. 1999;33(5):565–74.
Tenner S, Dubner H, Steinberg W. Predicting gallstone pancreatitis with labora-
tory parameters: a meta-analysis. Am J Gastroenterol. 1994;89(10):1863–6.
Zakko SF, Afdhal NH. Clinical features and diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. In:
UpToDate; 2007.
48 /  CHAPTER 3
Summary table of abdominal pain by location.
Radiation and
Differential 
Quality and 
Associated 
Location
Diagnosis
Frequency
Symptoms
Clinical Clues
RUQ
Biliary disease
Obstructive
Back, right shoulder;
Postprandial or nocturnal pain
Episodic
N & V
Dark urine
Pancreatitis
See “Epigastrium”below
Renal colic: Usually
Obstructive
Groin; N & V
Hematuria (usually microscopic)
flank pain
Episodic
Writhing, unable to get comfortable
LUQ
Splenic infarct or
Constant
Left shoulder pain 
Endocarditis, trauma, orthostatic
rupture 
hypotension, shoulder pain
Epigastrium
Peptic ulcer 
Hunger like, intermittent,
Back; early satiety,
Melena, history of NSAIDs;
gradual changes
Food may increase or  decrease pain
Pancreatitis
Boring, constant
Back; N & V
Worse supine; history of alcohol
abuse or gallstones
Biliary disease
See above
Diffuse periumbilical
Appendicitis
Steady, worsening;
Groin; Occasionally back;
Migration and progression
Migrates to RLQ
N & V anorexia
No prior similar episodes
Bowel Obstruction
Obstructive
N & V anorexia
Inability to pass stool or flatus, prior surgery
Mesenteric ischemia
Severe
Weight loss
Out of proportion to exam, brought on
by food, bruit
AAA
Excruciating
Back
Hypotension, syncope or pulsatile
abdominal mass
Irritable bowel
Crampy, recurring
Intermittent diarrhea,
Absence of weight loss or alarm 
syndrome
constipation
symptoms, recurring nature of symptoms
RLQ
Appendicitis
See “Diffuse 
periumbilical”above 
Diverticulitis 
Usually LLQ; see below
Cecal
Similar to bowel 
volvulus
obstruction; see above
Ovarian disease
Differential includes 
ovarian torsion,
Mittelschmerz, ectopic 
pregnancy and PID.
LLQ
Diverticulitis
Persistent, increasing
Back; Fever, N & V,
May have prior episodes, localized tenderness
diarrhea
Ovarian disease
See above
Sigmoid Volvulus
Similar to bowel 
obstructions; see above
AAA, abdominal aortic aneurysm; LLQ, left lower quadrant; LUQ, left upper quadrant; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; N & V, nausea and vomiting; PID,
pelvic inflammatory disease; RLQ, right lower quadrant; RUQ, right upper quadrant.
?
7
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. Y is a 30-year-old man with low back pain that has
lasted for 6 days.
What is the differential diagnosis of low back
pain? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Most low back pain is caused by conditions that are troublesome
but not progressive or life-threatening. The primary task when
evaluating a patient with low back pain is to identify those who
have serious causes of back pain that require specific, and some-
times rapid, diagnosis and treatment. In practice, this means dis-
tinguishing serious back pain (pain due to a systemic or visceral
disease or pain with neurologic symptoms or signs) from nonspe-
cific back pain related to the musculoskeletal structures of the
back, called mechanical back pain.
A. Back pain due to disorders of the musculoskeletal structures
1. Nonspecific back pain
a. In general, a specific anatomic diagnosis cannot be
made, and there is no definite relationship between
anatomic findings and symptoms.
b. There are no neurologic signs or symptoms.
c. It is nonprogressive.
d. Examples include the following:
(1) Lumbar strain and sprain
(2) Degenerative processes of disks and facets
(3) Spondylolisthesis (anterior displacement of a ver-
tebra on the one beneath it)
(4) Spondylolysis (defect in the pars interarticularis of
the vertebra)
(5) Scoliosis
2. Specific back pain
a. A specific anatomic diagnosis can often be made.
b. Neurologic signs and symptoms are present.
c. It can be progressive.
d. Examples include the following:
(1) Herniated disk
(2) Spinal stenosis
(3) Cauda equina syndrome
B. Back pain due to systemic disease affecting the spine
1. Serious, requiring specific and often rapid treatment
a. Neoplasia
(1) Multiple myeloma, metastatic carcinoma, lymphoma,
leukemia
(2) Spinal cord tumors, primary vertebral tumors
b. Infection
(1) Osteomyelitis
(2) Septic diskitis
(3) Paraspinal abscess
(4) Epidural abscess
2. Serious, requiring specific treatment but not necessarily
immediately
a. Osteoporotic compression fracture
b. Inflammatory arthritis
(1) Ankylosing spondylitis
(2) Psoriatic arthritis
(3) Reiter syndrome
(4) Inflammatory bowel disease–associated arthritis
C. Back pain due to visceral disease is serious and often requires
specific and rapid diagnosis and treatment.
1. Retroperitoneal
a. Aortic aneurysm
b. Retroperitoneal adenopathy or mass
2. Pelvic
a. Prostatitis
b. Endometriosis
c. Pelvic inflammatory disease
3. Renal
a. Nephrolithiasis
b. Pyelonephritis
c. Perinephric abscess
4. GI
a. Pancreatitis
b. Cholecystitis
c. Penetrating ulcer
It is essential to understand the clinical neuroanatomy of the lower
extremity to properly examine patients with low back pain
(Figures 7–1 and 7–2). Figure 7–3 outlines the diagnostic
approach to low back pain.
I have a patient with low back pain.
How do I determine the cause?
114
BACK PAIN /  115
1
Mr. Y felt well until 1 week ago, when he helped his girlfriend
move into her third floor apartment. Although he felt fine
while helping her, the next day he woke up with diffuse pain
across his lower back and buttocks. He spent that day
lying on the floor, with some improvement. Ibuprofen has
helped somewhat. He feels better when he is in bed and
had transiently worse pain after doing his usual weight
lifting at the gym.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL
Mr. Y’s history is consistent with nonspecific mechanical back
pain, which is the cause of 97% of the back pain seen in a primary
care practice. History and physical exam should focus on looking
for neurologic signs and symptoms that would suggest a specific
musculoskeletal cause, such as a herniated disk, and for signs and
symptoms that would suggest the presence of a systemic disease.
The clinical clues for the alternative diagnoses listed in Table 7–1
have been associated with an increased likelihood of a serious eti-
ology of back pain, and should all be considered pivotal points in
refining the differential diagnosis. Likelihood ratios for these find-
ings, when available, will be discussed later in the chapter.
Table 7–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
The clinical clues listed in Table 7–1 should be
assessed in all patients with back pain.
1
Mr. Y has no history of other illnesses. He has had no
trauma, weight loss, fever, chills, or recent infections. He
takes no medications and does not smoke, drink, or use
injection drugs. The back pain does not radiate to his
legs. On physical exam, he has mild tenderness across his
lower back; lower extremity strength, sensation, and
reflexes are normal. Straight leg raise test is negative.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Area supplied by
the cutaneous
branches of the
tibial nerve
Cutaneous branch
of the peroneal
nerve
Area supplied by
the femoral nerve
Area supplied by
the obturator nerve
Area supplied
by the lateral cutaneous
nerve of the thigh
Posterior
cutaneous
nerve of thigh
L1
S1
S2
S2
S2
S1
S3
S4
S5
L2
L3
L4
L5
L5
L4
L3
L5
Note: L5 supplies the
dorsum and sole of
the foot
L5
L4
Posterior
axial line
S1
S1
S1
Cutaneous
branch of
peroneal
nerve
A
B
Saphenous branch
of the femoral nerve
Figure 7–1. Distribution of cutaneous nerves (A) and nerve roots (B) in the leg. Also note that the patellar reflex
reflects L4 function, and the Achilles reflex reflects S1 function. (Reproduced, with permission, from Patten J. Neu-
rologic Differential Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Springer, 1996.)
116 /  CHAPTER 7
Hip flexion
llio-psoas (L2,3)
Direct nerve supply and femoral twigs
Knee extension
Quadriceps (L2,3,4) femoral nerve
Hip abduction
Glutei and tensor fascia lata (L4,5)
Hip adduction
Adductor group (L2,3,4)
Obturator nerve
Knee flexion
Hamstrings (L5, S1)
Tibial nerve, peroneal nerve
Lateral head of biceps femoris only
Hip extension
Glutei (L4,5)
Gluteal nerves
Plantar flexion
Dorsiflexion
Eversion of the foot
Inversion of the foot
S1, S2
Tibial nerve
(Gastrocnemii)
(Tibialis posterior)
L4, L5
Peroneal nerve
(Tibialis anterior)
(Long extensors)
(Peroneus tertius)
(Extensor digitorum
brevis)
S1
Peroneal nerve
(Peronei longus and
brevis)
(long extensors assist)
(Extensor digitorum
brevis)
L4
Tibial and peroneal nerves
(Note: tibialis anterior, an anterior
compartment muscle, and tibialis posterior,
a posterior compartment muscle, work
together)
Figure 7–2. The motor exam of the leg. (Reproduced, with permission, from Patten J. Neurologic Differential
Diagnosis, 2nd ed. Springer, 1996.)
BACK PAIN /  117
Low back pain
Sciatica,
neurologic symptoms,
duration of pain > 1 month, age > 50,
history of cancer, unexplained weight loss,
fever, recent skin or urinary infection,
immunosuppression, injection drug
use, significant trauma, osteoporosis,
corticosteroid use,
abnormal neurologic
exam?
Urinary retention,
urinary incontinence,
leg weakness, saddle
anesthesia?
Mechanical low
back pain; treat
conservatively
Consider herniated
disk; treat
conservatively
Response to
conservative
treatment?
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No further evaluation
necessary
Spine radiograph or
MRI to look for
vertebral metastasis
Spine radiograph to
look for osteoporotic
compression fracture
MRI to look for spinal
epidural abscess or
vertebral osteomyelitis
Sciatica?
History of cancer?
Osteoporosis
risk factors?
Fever,
injection drug use,
immunosuppression,
skin infection,
instrumentation?
Vascular risk factors?
Conservative therapy for
presumed spinal stenosis;
consider MRI to confirm
diagnosis; perform ABIs
to look for PAD
Conservative therapy for
presumed spinal stenosis;
consider MRI to
confirm diagnosis
Wide-based gait,
thigh pain, older
patient?
MRI; consider
epidural injection
or surgery
Immediate MRI to
rule out cauda
equina syndrome
ABI, ankle-brachial index; PAD, peripheral arterial disease.
Figure 7–3. Diagnostic approach: low back pain.
118 /  CHAPTER 7
Leading Hypothesis: Mechanical
Low Back Pain
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is nonradiating pain and stiffness in the
lower back, often precipitated by heavy lifting.
Disease Highlights
A. Can also have pain and stiffness in the buttocks and hips
B. Generally occurs hours to days after a new or unusual exertion
and improves when the patient is supine
C. Can rarely make a specific anatomic diagnosis
D. Prognosis
1. 75–90% of patients improve within 1 month
2. 25–50% of patients have additional episodes over the
next year
3. Risk factors for persistent low back pain include 
a. A history of previous back pain 
b. Depression 
c. Substance abuse 
d. Pending or past litigation or disability compensation 
e. Low socioeconomic status 
f. Work dissatisfaction
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Many asymptomatic patients will have anatomic abnormalities
on imaging studies.
1. 20% of patients aged 14–25 have degenerative disks on
plain radiographs.
2. 20–75% of patients younger than 50 years have herniated
disks on MRI.
3. 40–80% of patients have bulging disks on MRI.
4. Over 90% of patients older than age 50 have degenerative
disks on MRI.
5. Up to 20% of patients over age 50 have spinal stenosis.
B. Even in symptomatic patients, anatomic abnormalities are
not necessarily causative, and identifying them does not influ-
ence initial treatment decisions.
C. A specific pathoanatomic diagnosis cannot be made in 85%
of patients with isolated low back pain.
Patients who have none of the clinical clues should
not have any diagnostic testing done.
Treatment 
A. Acute low back pain
1. Randomized controlled trials have shown that acetamino-
phen, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDS),
and skeletal muscle relaxants are effective in relieving acute
low back pain.
2. There is little data regarding the effects of opioids and tra-
madol in acute low back pain, but they are sometimes used
in patients whose pain is not controlled with acetamino-
phen, NSAIDS, and muscle relaxants.
3. Specific back exercises do not help acute low back pain but
do help prevent recurrent back pain.
4. Heat and spinal manipulation have been shown to reduce
acute low back pain.
5. The best approach is NSAIDs and heat during the acute
phase and activity as tolerated until the pain resolves, fol-
lowed by specific daily back exercises.
Bed rest does not help acute pain and may prolong
the duration of pain.
B. Subacute or chronic low back pain
1. Tricyclic antidepressants, tramadol, opioids, gabapentin,
and benzodiazepines have all been shown to be effective in
treating chronic low back pain; the best evidence is for tri-
cyclic antidepressants.
Table 7–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr.Y.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Mechanical
Absence of symptoms 
Resolution within
back pain
listed below
3–4 weeks
Active Alternative—Most Common
Herniated disk
Sciatica 
CT or MRI
Abnormal neurologic
exam, especially in L5-S1
distribution
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Malignancy
Duration of pain
Spine radiograph
> 1 month
MRI
Age > 50
Previous cancer history
Unexplained weight loss
(> 10 lbs over 6 months)
Infection
Fever
MRI
Chills
Recent skin or urinary 
infection
Immunosuppression
Injection drug use
Cauda equina
Urinary retention
MRI
syndrome
Saddle anesthesia
Bilateral sciatica
Leg weakness
Decreased anal
sphincter tone
Other Hypotheses
Compression
Age > 70
Spine radiograph 
fracture
Significant trauma
MRI
History of osteoporosis
Corticosteroid use
BACK PAIN /  119
2. There is good evidence that cognitive-behavioral therapy,
exercise, spinal manipulation, and interdisciplinary reha-
bilitation are effective for chronic low back pain.
3. There is fair evidence that acupuncture, massage, and
some yoga techniques are effective.
4. Facet and epidural injection has not been shown to be
beneficial; local trigger point injection might be helpful.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Considering Mr. Y’s history and physical exam, there is no
need to consider other diagnoses at this point. Should
he not respond to conservative therapy, then the alter-
native diagnoses would need to be reconsidered.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
You reassure Mr. Y that his pain will resolve within
another 2–3 weeks. You recommend that he use
ibuprofen as needed and be as active as possible
within the limits of the pain. Rather than weight lift-
ing, you suggest swimming or walking for exercise
until his pain resolves. You also provide a handout on
proper lifting techniques and back exercises, to be
started after the pain resolves. He cancels a follow
up appointment 1 month later, leaving a message
that his pain is gone and he has resumed all of his
usual activities.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mrs. H, a 47-year-old woman, was well until 2 days ago, when
she developed low back pain after working in her garden and
pulling weeds for several hours. The pain is a constant, dull
ache that radiates to her right buttock and hip. Yesterday,
after sitting in a movie, the pain began radiating to the back
of the right knee. She has taken some acetaminophen and
ibuprofen without much relief. Her past medical history is
unremarkable, and she takes no medicines. She has no con-
stitutional, bowel, or bladder symptoms.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Similar to the patient discussed in the first case, Mrs. H developed
low back pain after an unusual exertion, and has no systemic
symptoms. However, her pain is worsened by sitting and radiates
down the back of her leg (which suggests sciatic pain). Both of
these pivotal features increase the probability that she has a herni-
ated disk. Table 7–2 lists the differential diagnosis.
2
On physical exam, Mrs. H is clearly uncomfortable. She
has no back tenderness and has full range of motion of
both hips. When her right leg is raised to about 60 degrees,
pain shoots down the leg. When her left leg is raised, she
has pain in her lower back. Her strength and sensation
are normal, but the right ankle reflex is absent.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Herniated Disk
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is moderate to severe pain radiating from
the back down the buttock and leg, usually to the foot or ankle,
with associated numbness or paresthesias. This type of pain is
called sciatica, and it is classically precipitated by a sudden increase
in pressure on the disk, such as after coughing or lifting.
Disease Highlights
A. Disk disease is frequently asymptomatic.
B. Numbness, paresthesias, and motor weakness are found vari-
ably; any of these can occur in the absence of pain.
Table 7–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. H.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Herniated 
Sciatica
CT or MRI
lumbar disk
Neurologic signs and
symptoms, especially
in L5-S1 distribution
Positive straight leg raise 
Active Alternative—Most Common
Nonspecific
No neurologic or systemic
Resolution of pain
mechanical
symptoms
back pain
120 /  CHAPTER 7
C. Most common site of weakness is foot plantar or dorsiflexion;
proximal weakness suggests a femoral neuropathy or com-
pression of the lumbar plexus.
D. Highest prevalence is in the 45- to 64-year-old age group.
E. Risk factors include sedentary activities, especially driving,
chronic cough, lack of physical exercise, and possibly preg-
nancy. Jobs involving lifting and pulling have not been asso-
ciated with increased risk.
F. 50% of patients recover in 2 weeks and 70% in 6 weeks.
G. L4–L5 and L5–S1 cause 98% of clinically important disk her-
niations, so pain and paresthesias are most often seen in these
distributions.
H. There are no bowel or bladder symptoms with unilateral disk
herniations.
I. Coughing, sneezing, or prolonged sitting can aggravate the
pain.
J. Bilateral midline herniations can cause the cauda equina
syndrome.
1. Cauda equina syndrome is a rare condition caused by
tumor or massive midline disk herniations.
2. It is characterized by the following: 
a. Urinary retention (sensitivity 90%, specificity 95%;
LR+ = 18, LR−= 0.1) 
b. Urinary incontinence 
c. Decreased anal sphincter tone (80% of patients) 
d. Sensory loss in a saddle distribution (75% of patients) 
e. Bilateral sciatica 
f. Leg weakness
Suspected cauda equina syndrome is a medical
emergency that requires immediate imaging and
decompression.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam (Table 7–3)
1. Sciatica has an LR+ of 7.9 for the diagnosis of L4-5 or L5-
S1 herniated disk.
2. Straight leg test is performed by holding the heel in 1
hand and slowly raising the leg, keeping the knee
extended.
a. A positive test reproduces the patient’s sciatica when
the leg is elevated between 30 and 60 degrees. 
b. The patient should describe the pain induced by the
maneuver as shooting down the leg, not just a pulling
sensation in the hamstring muscle.
3. Crossed straight leg test is performed by lifting the con-
tralateral leg; a positive test reproduces the sciatica in the
affected leg.
A straight leg raise test that elicits back pain is negative.
4. Combinations of abnormal findings (eg, positive straight
leg raise and neurologic abnormalities such as absent ankle
reflex, impaired plantar or dorsiflexion, impaired sensation
in L5–S1 distribution) are presumably more specific than
isolated findings.
B. Imaging
1. Plain radiographs do not image the disks and are useless
for diagnosing herniations.
2. CT and MRI scans have similar test characteristics for
diagnosing herniated disks.
a. CT: sensitivity, 62–90%; specificity, 70–87%; LR+,
2.1–6.9; LR−, 0.11–0.54
b. MRI: sensitivity, 60–100%; specificity, 43–97%; LR+,
1.1–33; LR−, 0–0.93
C. Electromyography
1. Might be useful in assessing possible nerve root dys-
function in patients with leg symptoms lasting more
than 4 weeks; not useful for isolated back pain
2. Data regarding sensitivity and specificity are flawed but
estimates are 71–100% sensitivity and 38–88% specificity.
Treatment
A. In the absence of cauda equina syndrome or progressive neu-
rologic dysfunction, conservative therapy should be tried for
1 month.
1. NSAIDs are the first choice.
2. Opioids are often necessary.
3. Bed rest does not accelerate recovery.
4. Epidural corticosteroid injections may provide temporary
pain relief.
B. Surgery
1. Indications include
a. Impairment of bowel and bladder function (cauda
equina syndrome)
b. Gross motor weakness
c. Progressive neurologic symptoms or signs
2. Surgery should not be done for painless herniations or
when the herniation is at a different level than the
symptoms.
Table 7–3. Physical exam findings for the diagnosis of disk
herniation.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Sciatica
95%
88%
7.9
0.06
Positive crossed
25% 
90%
2.5 
0.83 
straight leg raise 
Positive ipsilateral
91%
26%
1.2
0.3
straight leg raise 
Ankle dorsiflexion
35%
70%
1.2
0.93
weakness
Great toe extensor
50%
70%
1.7
0.71
weakness
Impaired ankle reflex
50%
60%
1.3
0.83
Ankle plantar flexion
6%
95%
1.2
0.99
weakness
FP
FP
BACK PAIN /  121
3. In the absence of progressive neurologic symptoms, sur-
gery is elective; patients with disk herniations and radicu-
lar pain generally recover with or without surgery.
a. Recent randomized trials of surgery versus conservative
therapy for symptomatic L4-5 or L5-S1 herniated disks
found short-term benefits for surgery
1. Patients who received surgery had better pain and
function scores at 12 weeks, but both groups had
identical scores at 52 weeks
2. The median time to recovery was 4 weeks for the surgery
group and 12 weeks for the conservative therapy group
b. Patient preference should drive decision making with
regard to surgery.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mrs. H has sciatica, a positive straight leg raise test, and
an absent ankle reflex, a combination that strongly sug-
gests nerve root impingement at L5–S1. However, none of
these findings is so specific that nonspecific mechanical
back pain has been ruled out. So, one option at this point
would be to order an MRI or CT scan to positively identify
a herniated disk. However, there are 2 questions to con-
sider before ordering a scan:
1. Will the scan be diagnostic? Remember that a signif-
icant percentage of asymptomatic people have herni-
ated disks on CT or MRI.
The abnormality on imaging studies must
correlate with the findings on history and
physical exam; in other words, the herniation
must affect the nerve associated with the
dermatome that matches the symptoms.
2. If the scan is diagnostic, will the finding change the ini-
tial management of the patient? Conservative therapy,
similar to that for nonspecific back pain, is indicated
initially unless the patient has cauda equina syndrome
or other rapidly progressive neurologic impairment.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
You decide not to order any imaging studies initially and
prescribe ibuprofen (800 mg 3 times daily) and activity as
tolerated. Mrs. H calls the next day, reporting that she
was unable to sleep because of the pain. You then prescribe
acetaminophen with codeine, which provides good pain
relief. Two weeks later, she is rarely using the codeine, and
is only using ibuprofen 1 to 2 times a day. Two months later,
she is pain free and back to her usual activities, although
her ankle reflex is still absent—a common and not signifi-
cant finding. She is fine until about a year later, when she
develops identical pain after a bad bronchitis. Her pain
resolves with a few days of acetaminophen with codeine.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mrs. P is a 75-year-old white woman who was well until
2 days ago when pain developed in the center of her
lower back. The pain is constant and becoming more
severe. There is no position or movement that changes
the pain, and it is not relieved with acetaminophen or
ibuprofen. It sometimes radiates in a belt like fashion
across her lower back, extending around to the
abdomen. She has no fever or weight loss. Her past
medical history is notable for a radial fracture after
falling off her bicycle 18 years ago, and breast cancer
15 years ago, treated with lumpectomy, radiation ther-
apy, and tamoxifen. She has had annual mammograms
since, all of which have been normal. She currently takes
no medications.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. P has several pivotal clinical findings that suggest her back
pain could be due to a more serious, systemic disease rather
than being nonspecific, mechanical back pain. First, she is
older and has a history of previous cancer; both findings are
associated with malignancy as a cause of back pain. Second, her
age, race, and history of a previous fracture are established risk
factors for osteoporosis. Table 7–4 lists the differential
diagnosis.
3
On physical exam, she is in obvious pain. She is 5 ft 2 in and
weighs 115 lbs. There is diffuse tenderness across her lower
back, with no point tenderness of the vertebrae. There is no
rash, and abdominal exam is normal. Her reflexes, strength,
and sensation are all normal, and straight leg raise is
negative.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
122 /  CHAPTER 7
Leading Hypothesis: Back Pain Due
to Metastatic Cancer
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is the development of constant, dull back
pain that is not relieved by rest and is worse at night in a patient
with a known malignancy.
Disease Highlights
A. Bone metastases can be limited to the vertebral body or
extend into the epidural space, causing cord compression.
B. Pain can precede cord compression by weeks or even months,
but compression progresses rapidly once it starts.
Cancer + back pain + neurologic abnormalities = an
emergency.
C. Malignancy causes about 1% of back pain in general but is the
cause in nearly all patients with cancer who have back pain.
D. Most common sources are breast, lung, or prostate cancer.
1. Renal and thyroid cancers also commonly metastasize to bone.
2. Myeloma and lymphoma frequently involve the spine.
E. In most cases of cancer metastasis, the thoracic vertebrae are
usually affected, while metastasis of prostate cancer most
often affects the lumbar vertebrae.
F. Blastic lesions seen with prostate, small cell lung cancer,
Hodgkin disease
G. Lytic lesions seen with renal cell, myeloma, non-Hodgkin lym-
phoma, melanoma, non–small cell lung cancer, thyroid cancer
H. Mixed blastic and lytic lesions seen with breast cancer and GI
cancers
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam 
1. Previous history of cancer has an LR+ of 14.7 for the diag-
nosis of vertebral metastasis as a cause of back pain.
2. Table 7–5 lists the historical and physical exam findings
associated with low back pain due to cancer.
If the patient is younger than 50 years, has no his-
tory of cancer, has not experienced unexplained
weight loss, and has not failed conservative therapy,
cancer is not likely to be the cause of back pain.
B. Imaging
1. Plain radiographs
a. Must lose about 50% of trabecular bone before a lytic
lesion is visible
b. Blastic lesions can be seen earlier on radiographs than
lytic lesions.
c. Sensitivity, 60%; specificity, 96–99.5%
d. LR+, 12–120; LR−, 0.4–0.42
2. CT scan: Sensitivity and specificity for diagnosing
metastatic lesions are unknown.
3. MRI
a. Sensitivity, 83–93%; specificity, 90–97%
b. LR+, 8.3–31; LR−, 0.07–0.19
4. Bone scan
a. Sensitivity, 74–98%; specificity, 64–81%
b. LR+, 3.9-10; LR−, 0.1–0.32
c. Better for blastic lesions than lytic lesions; myeloma, in
particular, can be missed on bone scan.
MRI scan is the best test for diagnosing or ruling
out cancer as a cause of back pain and for deter-
mining whether there is cord compression.
Table 7–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. P.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Metastatic
Duration of pain
Spine radiograph
breast cancer
> 1 month
MRI
Age > 50
Previous cancer history
Unexplained weight loss
(> 10 lbs over 6 months)
Active Alternative
Osteoporotic
Age > 70
Spine radiograph
compression
Significant trauma
MRI
fracture
History of osteoporosis
Corticosteroid use
Table 7–5. History and physical exam findings in the
diagnosis of cancer as a cause of low back pain.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Previous history
31%
98%
14.7
0.7
of cancer
Failure to improve
31%
90%
3.0
0.77
after 1 month
of therapy
Age > 50
77%
71%
2.7
0.32
Unexplained
15%
94%
2.7
0.9
weight loss
Duration of pain
50%
81%
2.6
0.62
> 1 month
No relief with
90%
46%
1.7
0.21
bed rest
Any of the following:
100%
60%
2.5
0.0
age > 50, history of
cancer, unexplained
weight loss, or failure
of conservative therapy
FP
BACK PAIN /  123
C. Laboratory tests: the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is
sometimes helpful
1. ≥20 mm/h: sensitivity, 78%; specificity, 67%; LR+, 2.4
2. ≥50 mm/h: sensitivity, 56%; specificity, 97%; LR+, 19.2
3. ≥100 mm/h: sensitivity, 22%; specificity, 99.4%; LR+, 55.5
Treatment
A. Surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy
B. Choice of therapy depends on the type of cancer and the
extent of the lesion.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
Since Mrs. P has no neurologic abnormalities, and plain
radiographs are relatively quick to perform, it is reasonable
to start with lumbar spine films. However, because of the
suboptimal LR−of about 0.4, it will be necessary to per-
form additional imaging if the plain radiographs are normal.
The lumbar spine films show a vertebral compression
fracture at L1, which is new when compared with films
done several months ago.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, metastatic cancer?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Osteoporotic
Compression Fracture
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is acute, severe pain that develops in an
older woman and radiates around the flank to the abdomen,
occurring either spontaneously or brought on by trivial activity
such as minor lifting, bending, or jarring.
Disease Highlights
A. Fractures are usually in mid to lower thoracic or lumbar region.
B. Fractures at T4 or higher are more often due to malignancy
than osteoporosis.
C. Pain is often increased by slight movements, such as turning
over in bed.
D. Can also be asymptomatic
E. Pain usually improves within 1 week and resolves by 4–6 weeks,
but some patients have more chronic pain.
F. Osteoporosis is most commonly primary, related to
menopause and aging.
G. Can occur as a complication of a variety of diseases and
medications.
1. Most common diseases include thyrotoxicosis, primary
hyperparathyroidism, vitamin D deficiency, hypogonadism,
and malabsorption.
2. Medications that can lead to osteoporosis include corti-
costeroids (most common), anticonvulsants, and long-
term heparin therapy.
H. Age is the strongest risk factor for developing osteoporosis,
with a RR of almost 10 for women aged 70–74 (compared
with women under 65), increasing to a RR of 22.5 for women
over 80.
1. Other risk factors include personal history of rib, spine,
wrist, or hip fracture; current smoking; white, Hispanic,
or Asian ethnicity; weight < 132 lbs; family history of
osteoporosis.
2. Risk of developing osteoporosis is decreased in women
who are obese, are of African American descent, and use
estrogen postmenopausally.
I. Over 15 years, the absolute risk of vertebral fracture is about
10% for women with T scores > −1.0 and about 30% for
women with T scores ≤−2.5. 
J. Women with a prevalent vertebral fracture and a T score > −1.0
have the same absolute risk of subsequent fracture, ~25%, as
women without prevalent fractures and T scores ≤−2.5.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. Not well studied
2. Age > 70 has LR+ of 5.5, 
3. History of corticosteroid use has LR+ of 12.0 for diagno-
sis of osteoporotic compression fracture as a cause of back
pain
B. Imaging
1. MRI is thought to be more sensitive and specific than
radiographs, but data are not available.
2. MRI scan can distinguish between benign and malignant
osteoporotic compression fractures, with sensitivity of
88.5–100% and specificity of 89.5–93% (LR+ = 8–14,
LR−= 0–0.12).
3. Bone scan can be useful for determining acuity.
MRI scan is the best way to distinguish malignant
from benign osteoporotic compression fractures.
Treatment 
A. Osteoporosis
1. Total calcium intake (dietary plus supplementation, if nec-
essary) should be 1200–1500 mg daily; total vitamin D
intake should be 700–800 international units daily.
2. Bisphosphonates both increase bone density and reduce
risk of subsequent spine and hip fractures.
a. Alendronate and risedronate are given orally once per week
b. Ibandronate is given orally once per month
c. Zoledronic acid is given intravenously once per year
3. Raloxifene reduces risk of spine fractures but not hip
fractures.
a. It also reduces the risk of estrogen receptor–positive
breast cancer (RR = 0.56)
b. It increases the risk of venous thromboembolism (RR
about 3)
FP
124 /  CHAPTER 7
4. Parathyroid hormone (teriparatide) increases bone density
and prevents fractures at the spine and the hip.
5. Estrogen can prevent fractures but is no longer recom-
mended for long-term therapy due to adverse events such
as deep venous thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, breast
cancer, myocardial infarction, and cerebrovascular
accidents.
6. Calcitonin does not significantly increase bone density or
prevent fractures.
B. Compression fractures
1. Calcitonin may reduce the pain from an acute vertebral
compression fracture.
2. Other options for treating the pain of vertebral compres-
sion fractures are vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty.
a. Vertebroplasty consists of percutaneous injection of
bone cement under fluoroscopic guidance into a col-
lapsed vertebra.
b. In kyphoplasty, inflatable bone tamps are also intro-
duced into the fractured vertebral body.
c. Neither procedure is well studied and should be
reserved for patients with intractable pain.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mrs. P undergoes an MRI scan, which confirms the diag-
nosis of osteoporotic compression fracture. She is
treated with opioids, and her pain resolves over 3–4 weeks.
Her bone density results show a spine T score of −2.1,
and a hip T score of −2.6. She has no diseases or med-
ication exposures associated with osteoporosis. She has
primary osteoporosis. Treatment is started.
Regardless of Mrs. P’s bone density results, the presence of a
vertebral compression fracture mandates treatment for osteo-
porosis. Reviewing her history, she had several risk factors for
osteoporosis, including her age, weight, and history of a wrist
fracture.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 4
Mr. F is a 65-year-old man with type 2 diabetes, hyper-
tension, and osteoarthritis who comes into your office
complaining of several months of low back pain. Some-
times the pain is limited to his back, but it sometimes
radiates to his buttocks, hips, and thighs when he walks.
Although generally achy in character, he sometimes feels
numbness in both thighs. The pain gets better when he
sits down, although he finds it also goes away while he is
grocery shopping if he bends a bit to push the cart. He
does not have pain while in bed, and he has more pain
standing than sitting. Over-the-counter ibuprofen helps
somewhat, but he feels quite limited in his activity.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? 
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential for back pain in a man this age is broad, but 2 piv-
otal historical findings suggest spinal stenosis: the sensation of
numbness with exertion (“pseudoclaudication”), and the improve-
ment in the pain when he bends forward to push a grocery cart.
Although he does not have the unremitting pain characteristic of
metastatic cancer, that is still a possibility. Another pivotal point is
that he has risk factors for vascular disease, and so peripheral arte-
rial disease must be considered. Other possibilities include
mechanical back pain, which remains common in patients over
65, although there should be no neurologic symptoms with
uncomplicated mechanical back pain. Disk herniation is a final
possibility, although it would have to be a central herniation to
explain the bilateral symptoms. Table 7–6 lists the differential
diagnosis.
Table 7–6. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. F.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis 
Spinal stenosis
Wide-based gait
MRI
Neurogenic claudication
Age > 65
Improvement with
sitting/bending forward
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Metastatic 
Duration of pain
Spine radiograph
cancer
> 1 month
MRI
Age > 50
Previous cancer history
Unexplained weight loss
(> 10 lbs over 6 months)
Peripheral 
Vascular risk factors
ABIs
arterial disease
Leg pain with walking
Active Alternative—Most Common
Mechanical
No neurologic or 
Resolution of pain
back pain
systemic symptoms
Central disk
Bilateral radicular pain
MRI
herniation
BACK PAIN /  125
4
Mr. F’s past medical history is notable for hypertension,
type 2 diabetes, and osteoarthritis of his knees. His
medications include lisinopril, glipizide, atorvastatin,
aspirin, and acetaminophen or ibuprofen. He has no his-
tory of cancer, and his prostate specific antigen (PSA)
was 0.9 ng/mL 1 month ago. He has no back tenderness.
Straight leg raise test is negative bilaterally; reflexes are
symmetric; strength is normal; and sensation is normal,
except for decreased vibratory sense in his feet. Dorsalis
pedis and posterior tibialis pulses are easily palpable. His
gait is normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Spinal Stenosis
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is somewhat vague, but persistent back
and leg discomfort brought on by walking or standing that is
relieved by sitting or bending forward is typically seen.
Disease Highlights
A. Leg symptoms are usually bilateral and are often described as
a heaviness or numbness brought on by standing or walking
(“pseudoclaudication”). Textbook descriptions of pain from
spinal stenosis differ qualitatively from textbook descriptions
of vascular claudication (Table 7–7).
B. Neurologic symptoms and signs are variable.
C. Stenosis is seen most often in lumbar spine, sometimes in cer-
vical spine, and rarely in thoracic spine.
D. Spinal stenosis is due to hypertrophic degenerative processes
and degenerative spondylolisthesis compressing the spinal
cord, cauda equina, individual nerve roots, and the arterioles
and capillaries supplying the cauda equina and nerve roots.
E. Pain is worsened by extension and relieved by flexion.
F. Patients with central stenosis generally have bilateral, non-
dermatomal pain involving the buttocks and posterior
thighs.
G. Patients with lateral stenosis generally have pain in a dermatomal
distribution.
H. Repeating the physical exam after rapid walking might
demonstrate subtle abnormalities.
I. About 50% of patients have stable symptoms; when worsen-
ing occurs, it is gradual.
1. Lumbar spinal stenosis does not progress to paralysis and
should be managed based on severity of symptoms.
2. Progression of cervical and thoracic stenoses can cause
myelopathy and paralysis and requires surgery more often
than lumbar spinal stenosis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam 
1. Wide-based gait has an LR+ of 14.3 for the diagnosis of
spinal stenosis.
2. Table 7–8 outlines the historical and physical exam find-
ings associated with the diagnosis of spinal stenosis. 
B. Imaging
1. Plain radiographs can detect compromise of vertebral
foramina by bone but not by soft tissue; radiography is not
as sensitive as CT or MRI.
2. CT and MRI have similar test characteristics.
a. CT scan: sensitivity, 90%; specificity, 80–96%; LR+,
4.5–22; LR−, 0.10–0.12
b. MRI: sensitivity, 90%; specificity, 72–99%; LR+,
3.2–90; LR−, 0.10–0.14
c. Up to 21% of asymptomatic patients over age 65 have
spinal stenosis on MRI.
CT and MRI scans can rule out spinal stenosis but
cannot necessarily determine whether visualized
stenosis is causing the patient’s symptoms.
Table 7–7. Findings that differentiate vascular from
neurogenic claudication.
Vascular
Neurogenic
Fixed walking distance
Variable walking distance 
before onset of symptoms
before onset of symptoms
Improved by standing still
Improved by sitting or bending
forward
Worsened by walking
Worsened by walking or standing
Painful to walk uphill
Can be painless to walk uphill due
to tendency to bend forward
Absent pulses
Present pulses
Skin shiny with loss of hair
Skin appears normal
Table 7–8. History and physical exam findings in the
diagnosis of spinal stenosis.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Wide-based gait
43%
97%
14.3
0.59
No pain when seated
46%
93%
6.6
0.58
Abnormal Romberg
39%
91%
4.3
0.67
test results
Symptoms improve
52%
83%
3.1
0.58
when seated
Vibration deficit
53%
81%
2.8
0.58
Age > 65
77%
69%
2.5
0.33
Pseudoclaudication
63%
71%
2.0
0.53
FP
126 /  CHAPTER 7
Treatment 
A. Evidence to guide treatment decisions is minimal.
B. Nonoperative treatment is successful (defined as stable or
improving symptoms) in 15–70% of patients.
1. Medications used for pain relief include NSAIDs, tricyclic
antidepressants, gabapentin, and sometimes opioids.
2. Physical therapy improves stamina and muscle strength in
the legs and trunk.
3. Epidural corticosteroid injection helps some patients,
especially those with radicular pain.
C. Surgery
1. Primary indication is increasing pain that is not responsive
to conservative measures.
2. Observational data show the following:
a. More effective in reducing leg pain than back pain
b. Reported improvement rates range between 64% and 91%.
c. Reoperation rates range from 6% to 23%.
d. Predictors of a positive response to surgery include male
gender, younger age, better walking ability, better self-
rated health, less comorbidity, and more pronounced
canal stenosis.
3. A recent trial with both a randomized and observation
cohort showed the following:
a. In the intention to treat analysis of the randomized
cohort, patients randomized to surgery reported better
scores on one measure of bodily pain at 2 years than
did those randomized to conservative therapy.
b. In the analysis of the observational cohort, patients
who chose surgery reported better pain and function
scores than those who chose conservative therapy.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
4
Mr. F’s history remains suggestive of spinal stenosis; his
physical exam neither rules in nor rules out the diagnosis. You
order an MRI scan.
Mr. F’s lumbar MRI shows central canal stenosis at
the L3-L4 level. There is also bilateral neural foraminal
stenosis at L4-L5. There are no compression fractures
or lytic or blastic lesions.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, spinal stenosis? Have
you ruled out the active alternative, peripheral
arterial disease? Do other tests need to be
done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Peripheral Arterial
Disease (PAD)
Textbook Presentation
Classic claudication is defined as reproducible, exercise-induced
calf pain that requires stopping and is relieved with less than
10 minutes of rest. Critical limb ischemia classically presents with
pain in the feet at rest that may be relieved by placing the feet in
a dependent position.
Disease Highlights
A. In a study of outpatients over the age of 70, or aged 50–69
with a history of smoking or diabetes, the prevalence of PAD
was 29%.
1. Only 11% of the patients with PAD had classic
claudication.
2. 47% of patients had atypical symptoms (exertional leg
pain that was not in the calf or was not relieved by rest),
and 42% had no leg pain.
B. Critical limb ischemia is presenting manifestation in 1–2% of
patients. 
C. Risk factors include 
1. Smoking (risk of PAD increases by 1.4 for every 10 ciga-
rettes smoked/day) 
2. Hypertension (risk of PAD increases by 1.5 for mild and
2.2 for moderate hypertension) 
3. Diabetes (risk of PAD increases by 2.6)
4. Hyperlipidemia (risk of PAD increases by 1.2 for each
40 mg/dL increase in cholesterol)
D. Patients with PAD have a high prevalence of coronary artery
disease and cerebrovascular disease with an annual rate of car-
diovascular events of 5–7%.
E. PAD is associated with a progressive decline in walking
endurance and an increased rate of depression.
F. Pretest probabilities of PAD in patients with a variety of risk
factors are shown in Table 7–9.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. The presence of classic claudication has an LR+ = 3.30
2. The absence of claudication has an LR−= 0.89.
Table 7–9. Pretest probabilities of PAD.
Patients with 
Asymptomatic
leg complaints
patients
Age 60–80
15%
Age 60–69
5%
Age 70–79
12%
Stroke
26%
15%
Ischemic heart disease
19%
13%
Diabetes
18%
11%
Hypercholesterolemia
15%
6%
Hypertension
12%
7%
Male sex
12%
5%
Smoking (current or quit
11%
7%
in last 5 years)
PAD, peripheral arterial disease.
BACK PAIN /  127
B. Physical exam
1. Skin changes
a. In symptomatic patients, skin being cooler to the
touch and the presence of a foot ulcer in the affected
leg both have a LR+ = 5.9 and a LR−of about 1.0
b. Skin changes (atrophic or cool skin, blue/purple skin,
absence of lower limb hair) are not useful in assessing
for PAD in asymptomatic patients
2. Bruits
a. In symptomatic patients the presence of an iliac,
femoral or popliteal bruit has a LR+ = 5.6; the absence
of a bruit in ALL three locations has a LR−= 0.39
b. In asymptomatic patients, the finding of a femoral
bruit has a LR+ = 4.8; the absence of a femoral bruit
does not change the probability of PAD
3. Pulses
FP
a. An abnormal femoral pulse has a LR+ = 7.2; an abnor-
mal posterior tibial pulse has a LR+ = 8.10
b. An abnormal dorsalis pedis pulse does not increase the
probability of PAD (LR+ = 1.9); the dorsalis pedis
pulse is not palpable in 8.1% of normal individuals.
c. The absence of an abnormality in any pulse has a wide
range of negative LRs (0.38–0.87).
4. Capillary refill time
a. Apply firm pressure to the plantar aspect of the great
toe for 5 seconds; after releasing the toe, normal color
should return in ≤5 seconds
b. Neither sensitive nor specific for diagnosing PAD
Lack of typical symptoms and physical findings
does NOT lower the likelihood of PAD.
C. Ankle-brachial index (ABI)
1. Figure 7–4 shows how ABIs are done
2. Using a cutoff of 0.90 or less to define abnormal, the sen-
sitivity is 95% and specificity 99% for the diagnosis of
PAD (LR+ = 95, LR−= 0.05)
3. An ABI of 0.71–0.9 = mild PAD; 0.41–0.70 = moderate
PAD; 0.00–0.40 = severe PAD
Treatment
A. Risk factor modification: smoking cessation, control of hyper-
tension and diabetes, reduction of LDL to < 100 mg/dL
B. Antiplatelet therapy with aspirin or clopidogrel reduces
myocardial infarction, stroke, and death from vascular
causes; there is no additional benefit with combination
therapy
Figure 7–4. Performing the ABI. (Reproduced, with permission, from White C. Intermittent claudication. N Engl
J Med. 2007;356:1241–50.)
Pressure at right
or left arm
Pressure at posterior tibial
and dorsalis pedis arteries in
right and left ankle
Interpretation of calculated index
Formula
Example
Above 0.90—Normal
0.71–0.90—Mild obstruction
0.41–0.70—Moderate obstruction
0.00–0.40—Severe obstruction
92 mm Hg
164 mm Hg
= 0.56 = Moderate obstruction
=
Highest ankle pressure
Highest brachial pressure
Highest left ankle pressure (mm Hg)
Highest arm pressure (mm Hg)
Left ankle-brachial index =
Highest right ankle pressure (mm Hg)
Highest arm pressure (mm Hg)
Right ankle-brachial index =
To calculate the ankle–brachial index, systolic pressures are determined in both arms and both ankles with the use of a hand-held
Doppler instrument. The highest readings for the dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial arteries are used to calculate the index.
128 /  CHAPTER 7
C. Cilostazol 100 mg twice daily increases walking distance by
50% after 3–6 months of use; pentoxifylline has no effect on
walking distance.
D. Exercise, especially a supervised exercise program, can increase
walking by up to 150% over 3–12 months.
E. Revascularization, either surgical or percutaneous translumi-
nal angioplasty, is indicated for critical limb ischemia, and for
claudication unresponsive to exercise and pharmacologic
therapy that limits patients’ lifestyle or ability to work.
CASE RESOLUTION
4
Mr. F’s pretest probability of PAD is at least 18%. You
order ABIs, which show mild PAD (bilateral indices of
0.89). He begins taking 25 mg of amitriptyline at bed-
time and continues using acetaminophen or ibuprofen
during the day. After attending physical therapy for
8 weeks, he reports some improvement in his exercise tol-
erance, although he still has daily pain. An epidural corti-
costeroid injection provides more pain relief, and he is
able to continue a walking program.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Spinal Epidural Abscess
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is a patient with a history of diabetes or
injection drug use who has fever and back pain, followed by neu-
rologic symptoms (eg, motor weakness, sensory changes, and
bowel or bladder dysfunction).
Disease Highlights
A. Pathogenesis
1. Most patients have one or more predisposing conditions.
a. Underlying disease (diabetes mellitus, alcoholism, HIV) 
b. Spinal abnormality or intervention (degenerative joint
disease, trauma, surgery, drug injection)
c. Potential local or systemic source of infection (skin or
soft tissue infection, osteomyelitis, urinary tract infec-
tion, injection drug use, epidural anesthesia,
indwelling vascular access)
2. Infection occurs by contiguous spread in 33% of cases and
by hematogenous spread in 50%.
3. Staphylococcus aureus is the organism in 66% of cases. 
a. Other organisms include Staphylococcus epidermidis,
Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
b. Anaerobes, mycobacteria, fungi, and parasites are occa-
sionally found.
B. Clinical manifestations
1. Back pain in 75% of patients
2. Fever in about 50% of patients
3. Neurologic deficits are found in about 33% of patients.
4. More common in posterior than anterior epidural space, and
more common in the thoracolumbar than cervical areas.
5. Generally extend over 3–5 vertebrae
C. Staging
1. Stage 1: back pain at the level of the affected spine
2. Stage 2: nerve root pain radiating from the involved spinal
area
3. Stage 3: motor weakness, sensory deficit, bladder/bowel
dysfunction
4. Stage 4: paralysis
5. Rate of progression from one stage to another is highly
variable.
6. The most important predictor of the final neurologic out-
come is the neurologic status before surgery, with the post-
operative neurologic status being as good as or better than
the preoperative status.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. ESR and C-reactive protein are usually elevated.
B. Leukocytosis is present in about 66% of patients.
C. Bacteremia is present in 60% of patients.
D. MRI is best imaging study, with a sensitivity of > 90%.
Treatment
A. Emergent surgical decompression and drainage
B. Antibiotics
Vertebral Osteomyelitis
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is unremitting back pain often, but not
always, with fever.
Disease Highlights
A. Pathogenesis
1. Most commonly hematogenous spread; can also occur due
to contiguous spread or direct infection from trauma or
surgery.
2. Generally causes bony destruction of 2 adjacent vertebral
bodies and collapse of the intervertebral space.
B. Microbiology
1. S aureus in over 50% of patients
2. Group B and G hemolytic streptococcus, especially in dia-
betic patients
3. Enteric gram-negative bacilli, especially after urinary tract
instrumentation
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. Injection drug use, urinary tract infection, or skin infec-
tion: sensitivity, 40%
2. Spinal tenderness 
a. Sensitivity, 86%; specificity, 60% 
b. LR+, 2.1; LR−, 0.23
3. Fever 
a. Sensitivity, 52%; specificity, 98% 
b. LR+, 26; LR−0.49
BACK PAIN /  129
B. Laboratory tests
1. Leukocytosis: sensitivity, 43%; specificity, 94%; LR+, 7.2;
LR−0.6
2. ESR: sensitivity and specificity unknown, but most
patients in reported case series have an elevated ESR, often
over 100 mm/h
3. Blood cultures are positive in 50–70% of patients; needle
aspiration is necessary to establish causative organism if
blood cultures are negative.
C. Imaging
1. Radiographs: sensitivity, 82%; specificity, 57%; LR+, 1.9;
LR−, 0.32
2. MRI: sensitivity, 96%; specificity, 92%; LR+, 12; LR−,
0.04
3. Bone scan: sensitivity, 90%; specificity, 78%; LR+, 4.1;
LR−, 0.13
Treatment
A. Primarily antibiotics for 6 weeks
B. Surgery is necessary only if neurologic symptoms suggest
onset of vertebral collapse causing cord compression or devel-
opment of spinal epidural abscess.
Endocarditis should be considered in patients with
either vertebral osteomyelitis or a spinal epidural
abscess.
REFERENCES
Cauley JA, Hochberg MC, Lui LY et al. Long-term risk of incident vertebral frac-
tures. JAMA. 2007;298(23):2761–67.
Chou R, Qaseem A, Snow V et al; Clinical Efficacy Assessment Subcommittee of
the American College of Physicians; American College of Physicians; Amer-
ican Pain Society Low Back Pain Guidelines Panel. Diagnosis and treatment
of low back pain: a joint clinical practice guideline from the American Col-
lege of Physicians, and the American Pain Society. Ann Intern Med.
2007;147:478–91.
Dauouich RO. Spinal epidural abscess. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2012–20.
De Graaf I, Prak A, Bierma-Zeinstras S, Thomas S, Peul W, Koes B. Diagnosis of
lumbar spinal stenosis. Spine. 2006;31:1168–76.
Jarvik J, Deyo R. Diagnostic evaluation of low back pain with emphasis on imag-
ing. Ann Intern Med. 2002;137:586–97.
Khan N, Rahim S, Anad S et al. Does the clinical examination predict lower
extremity peripheral arterial disease? JAMA. 2006;295:536–46.
Lurie JD. What diagnostic tests are useful for low back pain? Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol. 2005;19:557–75.
Peul WC, van Houwelingen HC, van den Hout WB et al; Leiden–The Hague
Spine Intervention Prognostic Study Group. Surgery versus prolonged con-
servative treatment for sciatica. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:2245–56.
Weinstein JN, Tosteson TD, Lurie JD, et al for the SPORT Investigators. Surgical
versus nonsurgical therapy for lumbar spinal stenosis. N Engl J Med.
2008;358:794–810. 
White C. Intermittent claudication. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1241–50.
?
8
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. W is a 56-year-old man who comes to your office with
chest pain.
What is the differential diagnosis of chest
pain? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A patient with chest pain poses one of the most complicated diag-
nostic challenges. The differential diagnosis is enormous and
includes diagnoses that can be imminently life-threatening if
missed. The main pivotal points when considering a history of
chest pain is the acuity of onset of the pain and whether or not the
pain is pleuritic (worsening with inspiration). The differential
diagnosis of chest pain is the model for an anatomic approach to
diagnosis. Consideration needs to be given to the structures from
the skin to the internal organs. The differential below is organized
anatomically.  
A. Skin: Herpes zoster
B. Breast
1. Fibroadenomas
2. Gynecomastia
C. Musculoskeletal
1. Costochondritis
2. Precordial catch syndrome
3. Pectoral muscle strain
4. Rib fracture
5. Cervical or thoracic spondylosis (C4-T6)
6. Myositis
D. Esophageal
1. Spasm
2. Esophagitis
a. Reflux
b. Medication-related
3. Neoplasm
E. GI
1. Peptic ulcer disease
2. Gallbladder disease
3. Liver abscess
4. Subdiaphragmatic abscess
5. Pancreatitis
F. Pulmonary
1. Pleura
a. Pleural effusion
b. Pneumonia
c. Neoplasm
d. Viral infections
e. Pneumothorax
2. Lung
a. Neoplasm
b. Pneumonia
3. Pulmonary vasculature
a. Pulmonary embolism (PE)
b. Pulmonary hypertension
G. Cardiac
1. Pericarditis
2. Myocarditis
3. Myocardial ischemia (stable angina, myocardial infarction
[MI] or unstable angina)
H. Vascular: Thoracic aortic aneurysm or aortic dissection
I. Mediastinal structures
1. Lymphoma
2. Thymoma
J. Psychiatric
1
Mr. W comes in regularly for management of hypertension
and diabetes, both of which are under good control. He has
been having symptoms since just after his last visit
4 months ago. He feels squeezing, substernal pressure while
climbing stairs to the elevated train he rides to work. The
pressure resolves after about 5 minutes of rest. He also
occasionally feels the sensation during stressful periods at
work. It is occasionally associated with mild nausea and jaw
pain. Medications are metformin, aspirin, and enalapril.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
I have a patient with chest pain.
How do I determine the cause?
130
CHEST PAIN /  131
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. W is a middle-aged man with risk factors for coronary artery
disease (CAD), whose symptoms are consistent with stable angina.
The pivotal points in this case are the chronicity, exertional nature,
and substernal location of the pain. Given the seriousness and
prevalence of CAD, it must lead the differential diagnosis. Gas-
troesophageal reflux disease (GERD) and musculoskeletal disorders
are common causes of chest pain that can mimic angina (exacer-
bated by activity, sensation of pressure, radiation to back) and thus
should be considered. The chronicity of the symptoms argues
against many other worrisome diagnoses (eg, PE, pneumothorax,
pericarditis, or aortic dissection). Pain from a mediastinal abnor-
mality is possible. Table 8–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
Physical exam is entirely unremarkable except for mild,
stable peripheral neuropathy presumably related to dia-
betes. The patient’s ECG is remarkable only for evidence
of left ventricular hypertrophy with strain. 
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Stable Angina
Textbook Presentation
Although atypical presentations are common, stable angina usu-
ally presents with classic symptoms of substernal chest discomfort
precipitated by exertion. These symptoms resolve promptly with
rest or nitroglycerin and do not change over the course of weeks.
Affected patients usually have risk factors for CAD.
Disease Highlights
A. Stable angina is a chest pain syndrome caused by a mismatch
between myocardial oxygen supply and demand.
1. Usually a product of coronary artery stenosis.
2. Can occur in the setting of normal or nearly normal coro-
nary arteries and
a. Anemia
b. Tachycardia of any cause (atrial fibrillation, hyperthy-
roidism)
c. Aortic stenosis
d. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
e. Heart failure (HF) (the result of high filling pressures)
It is important to consider causes of angina other
than CAD.
B. Stable angina is a common presentation for CAD.
C. Although exertional chest pain is the most common symptom
of stable angina, other presentations are possible. Presentations
may vary by what elicits the pain and what the symptoms are.
1. Eliciting factors other than exercise
a. Cold weather
b. Extreme moods (anger, stress)
c. Large meals
2. Symptoms other than chest pain
a. Dyspnea
b. Nausea or indigestion
c. Pain in areas other than the chest (eg, jaw, neck, teeth,
back, abdomen)
d. Palpitations
e. Syncope
f. Weakness and fatigue
D. The risk factors for CAD are important to elicit when the
patient’s history is suspicious. The traditional risk factors follow:
1. Male sex
2. Age > 55 years in men and > 65 years in women
3. Tobacco use
4. Diabetes
5. Hypertension
6. Family history of premature cardiovascular disease
(younger than age 55 in men and younger than age 65 in
women).
7. Abnormal lipid profile
a. Elevated low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
b. Elevated triglycerides
c. Elevated cholesterol/high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
ratio (Ratio should be < 5:1, ideally < 3.5:1).
d. Low HDL
E. Other risk factors
1. Hyperhomocysteinemia
2. Elevated levels of inflammation (C-reactive protein)
3. Plasma fibrinogen
Table 8–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr.W.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Stable angina
Substernal chest
Exercise tolerance test
pressure with exertion
Angiogram
Active Alternative—Most Common
GERD
Symptoms of
EGD
heartburn, chronic
Esophageal pH 
nature
monitoring
Active Alternative
Musculoskeletal
History of injury 
Physical exam
disorders
or specific
Response to
musculoskeletal
treatment
chest pain syndrome
EGD, esophagogastroduodenoscopy; GERD, gastroesophageal reflux disease.
4. Microalbuminuria
5. Cocaine use should be asked about because although it is
not a risk factor for CAD, it can cause both angina and MI.
Asking about the traditional cardiac risk factors
should be a part of the history for any patient with
chest pain.
F. Stable angina and CAD in women
1. Although the pathophysiology of stable angina is the same
in men and women, it raises some unique issues in women
that deserve comment.
2. CAD presents differently in women than in men.
a. Because CAD usually presents in women at an older
age than in men, there are more comordid diseases to
confuse the presentation.
b. Women describe their chest pain differently, using
terms like “burning” and “tender” more frequently.
3. There is good evidence that the diagnostic tests used for
CAD, which are discussed later in this chapter, are less
accurate in women than in men. 
4. Because there is a lower prevalence of disease among
women:
a. Physicians often do not consider the diagnosis
b. Lower pretest probability leads to worse positive pre-
dictive value of diagnostic tests (there are more false-
positive results on noninvasive tests).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. The first step in diagnosing CAD is taking an accurate his-
tory of the patient’s chest pain.
2. The vocabulary physicians use when discussing chest pain
has been well validated to correlate with different risks of
underlying CAD. The descriptions depend on the answers
to 3 questions:
a. Is your chest discomfort substernal? (“Where is your
pain?”)
b. Are your symptoms precipitated by exertion? (“Does
your pain come on or get worse when you walk, walk
fast, or climb stairs?”)
c. Does rest provide prompt relief of your symptoms
(within 10 minutes)? (“Does you pain get better with
rest?”)
3. The number of questions to which the patient answers yes
can predict the prevalence of CAD (Table 8–2).
Use the patient’s own words when taking a history
(eg, pressure, burning, aching, squeezing, piercing).
4. It is important to recognize that comorbidities can
markedly influence the probability of disease. As an
example, the rate of CAD in a 55-year-old woman with
atypical angina goes from about 32% with no risk fac-
tors to 47% if the woman has diabetes, smokes, or is
hypertensive.
Almost any symptom, other than musculoskeletal
ones, that reliably recurs with exertion should raise
the possibility of atypical angina.
5. Men over 50 and women over 60 who present with symp-
toms of typical angina have over a 90% likelihood of hav-
ing coronary artery disease.
6. The remainder of the history should be aimed at collect-
ing evidence that makes the diagnosis of CAD more likely,
such as
a. Cardiac risk factors
b. Past history of cardiac disease
c. Symptoms classic for other causes of chest pain
7. Factors that make the diagnosis of CAD less likely include
a. Unremitting pain of prolonged duration
b. Other explanations for the patient’s symptoms
132 /  CHAPTER 8
Table 8–2. Prevalence of coronary artery disease (%).1
Age
Asymptomatic2
Nonanginal Chest Pain3
Atypical Angina4
Typical Angina5
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
30-39
1.9
0.3
5.2
0.8
21.8
4.2
69.7
25.8
40-49
5.5
1.0
14.1
2.8
46.1
13.3
87.3
55.2
50-59
9.7
3.2
21.5
8.4
58.9
32.4
92
79.4
60-69
12.3
7.5
28.1
18.6
67.1
54.4
94.3
90.6
1See text for questions.
2Zero of 3 questions answered yes.
3One of 3 questions answered yes.
4Two of 3 questions answered yes.
5All 3 questions answered yes.
Data from Diamond GA, Forrester JS. Analysis of probability as an aid in the clinical diagnosis of coronary-artery disease. N Engl J Med. 1979;300:1350–1358.
Copyright © 1979 Massachusetts Medical Society. All Rights Reserved.
FP
CHEST PAIN /  133
8. Initial tests that should be done at the initial presentation
include
a. Glucose and lipid profile because they can identify dis-
eases that increase the likelihood of chest pain being
ischemic in origin.
b. Hgb and TSH because they can identify other diseases
that may cause angina.
c. Resting ECG because it looks for evidence of previous
infarction.
d. Troponin, if the anginal symptoms had been particu-
larly severe or long lasting.
B. Exercise testing
1. Except in very rare cases, patients with symptoms of stable
angina should have an exercise test.
2. The test is used for 2 main purposes: to diagnose CAD
and to determine whether patients should be treated with
medication only, PCI (percutaneous intervention), or with
bypass surgery.
3. Decisions about treatment are based on a number factors,
many coming from the results of exercise testing:
a. The extent and severity of ischemia (most important)
b. Other prognostic variables, such as aerobic ability,
blood pressure and heart rate response to exercise, and
inducible left ventricular function.
4. All exercise tests attempt to induce and detect myocardial
ischemia.
a. Myocardial ischemia may be induced by exercise,
dobutamine, adenosine, or dipyridamole.
b. Myocardial ischemia may be detected by ECG,
echocardiogram, or nuclear imaging.
5. Exercise electrocardiography is the simplest and least
expensive test. It requires a normal resting ECG.
a. The sensitivity of the exercise stress test can be
improved (at the cost of lower specificity) by reducing
the degree of ST depression needed for a positive test.
b. The sensitivity of an exercise test will fall if the patient
does not reach an adequate degree of exercise, as meas-
ured by the rate-pressure product.
6. The sensitivity, specificity, and LRs of some of the various
tests are shown in Table 8–3. (It should be noted that the
test characteristics of stress thallium and dobutamine
echocardiography vary among healthcare centers.)
7. The decision whether to order a routine exercise test or
one with imaging is difficult. In general, definite reasons
to obtain imaging are
a. Abnormal resting ECG
b. Previous coronary artery bypass grafting surgery
(CABG) or PCI
c. A more sensitive test is required to rule out CAD, such
as in patients with a high likelihood of CAD.
8. Means of increasing coronary demand other than exercise
(pharmacologic stress tests) are indicated for patients who
are unable to exercise. They may also be more accurate in
patients with a left bundle-branch block.
9. A patient with stable angina might not undergo an exer-
cise test if the patient has a high likelihood of disease (a test
therefore does not need to be done for diagnostic purposes)
and the patient would not benefit from determining the
distribution or severity of the disease (usually because the
patient would not or could not undergo revascularization).
C. Angiography
1. The gold standard for diagnosing CAD.
2. The indications for patients with stable angina to undergo
angiography include
a. Abnormal stress indicating substantial ischemia
b. Ischemia at a low workload on an exercise test
c. Diagnostic uncertainty after an exercise test 
3. Patients may undergo angiography without first having an
exercise test in the 2 circumstances when they will almost
certainly require invasive therapy (PCI or CABG).
a. When their symptoms are disabling despite therapy.
b. When they have HF.
Treatment 
A. The goal of treatment in patients with stable angina is to
decrease symptoms and inhibit disease progression. Patients
with stable angina have about a 3%/year risk of both MI and
death.
B. Nonpharmacologic
1. Smoking cessation
2. Exercise (intensity guided by exercise testing)
3. Low fat, low cholesterol diet
C. Pharmacologic
1. Symptomatic treatment. It is important to recognize that
patients often need a combination of medicines to control
their symptoms.
a. Decrease oxygen demand: β-blocker or the calcium
channel blockers verapamil or diltiazem
b. Increase oxygen supply: long- and short-acting nitrates
2. Inhibit disease progression
a. Aspirin
b. Clopidogrel in patients who are intolerant of aspirin or
who have had PCI.
Table 8–3. Test characteristics of exercise tests.
Test
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Exercise ECG
65–70%
70–75%
≈ 2.5
≈ .45
> 1 mm depression
Exercise
80–85%
80–85%
≈ 4.8
≈ 0.21
echocardiography
Dobutamine
80–85%
85–90%
≈ 6.7
≈ 0.23
echocardiography
Exercise
85–90%
85–90%
≈ 6.9
≈ 0.15
myocardial
perfusion SPECT
Pharmacologic
80–90%
80–90%
≈ 7
≈ 0.18
myocardial
perfusion SPECT
SPECT, single photon emission computed tomography.
134 /  CHAPTER 8
c. Risk factor modification
(1) Lipid lowering with an HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor (statin) to a goal LDL or < 70 mg/dL.
(2) ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker
(ARB) in patients at the highest risk, such as those
with diabetes or HF.
(3) Glycemic control in patients with diabetes
D. Interventional therapy (either via PCI or bypass surgery) is the
mainstay of treatment for the acute coronary syndromes dis-
cussed below. For stable angina, it plays a critical role for patients
with more severe disease. An overview of the data is below.
1. In low-risk patients (such as those with single vessel disease)
a. There is no difference in mortality between medical
management and PCI.
b. Patients who undergo a PCI tend to have better con-
trol of their symptoms but undergo more procedures.
2. In moderate-risk patients (such as those with multivessel
disease but an otherwise normal heart)
a. PCI and CABG are about equal in terms of mortality
and both are superior to medical therapy.
b. PCI leads to more procedures.
3. In high-risk patients (such as those with disease of the left
main coronary artery, 3 vessel disease, or 2 vessel disease
involving the proximal left anterior descending artery)
a. Bypass surgery has a clear survival benefit compared
with medical therapy.
b. For selected patients, PCI can have a similar outcome
to surgery.
c. Bypass surgery is superior in patients with diabetes.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
A tentative diagnosis of stable angina from CAD is made.
Laboratory data are notable for normal blood counts and
chemistries. There is hypercholesterolemia (LDL 136 mg/dL,
HDL 42 mg/dL). Mr. W is referred for an exercise tolerance
test. Because of his abnormal resting ECG, an exercise
myocardial perfusion SPECT was performed. Although
chest pain developed during the test, his results were nor-
mal without evidence of myocardial ischemia.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, stable angina? Have
you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
The results of the patient’s exercise test are surprising. Stable
angina remains high in the differential despite the normal stress
test but alternative diagnoses must be considered. The intermit-
tent nature of the pain and the lack of constitutional signs make a
mediastinal lesion unlikely. The absence of a recent injury, change
in activity or reproducible pain on physical exam moves muscu-
loskeletal pain down on the differential. GERD is a common
cause of chest pain and should be considered.
Alternative Diagnosis: GERD
Textbook Presentation
Heartburn is usually the presenting symptom in a patient with
GERD. Other classic symptoms are regurgitation or dysphagia;
chest pain is a common alternative presentation. Patients often
report that their symptoms are worst at night and after large meals.
Although dysphagia is a common presentation of
GERD, its presence raises the possibility of an
obstructing lesion and thus mandates prompt eval-
uation, usually with upper endoscopy.
Disease Highlights
A. The symptoms of GERD are so well known that most
patients diagnose themselves before visiting a physician.
B. GERD is a common cause of chest pain that may mimic that
of more sinister causes.
GERD is such a common cause of acute chest pain
that it should always be considered in the differen-
tial diagnosis of chest pain.
C. There are GI and non-GI complications of GERD.
1. GI
a. Esophagitis
b. Stricture formation
c. Barrett esophagus
d. Esophageal adenocarcinoma
2. Non-GI
a. Chronic cough
b. Hoarseness
c. Worsening of asthma
D. Esophageal disorders, other than GERD, might also present
as chest pain.
1. Esophagitis or esophageal ulcer
a. Odynophagia common
b. Multiple causes included infection and pill esophagitis
c. Pill esophagitis is especially associated with certain
medications:
(1) Bisphosphonates
(2) Tetracyclines
(3) Antiinflammatories
(4) Potassium chloride
2. Esophageal cancer
a. Often associated with dysphagia
b. Smoking, alcohol use, and chronic reflux are risk factors.
3. Esophageal rupture (Boerhaave syndrome). Often presents
with acute pain after retching.
4. Esophageal spasm and motility disorders. Often presents
with intermittent chest pain and dysphagia.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. GERD should be high in the differential diagnosis of chest
pain when heartburn, regurgitation, or dysphagia is present or
CHEST PAIN /  135
when other commonly associated symptoms or complications
(eg, chronic cough and asthma) are present.
B. Identifying factors that exacerbate the symptoms of GERD is
helpful both in diagnosis and management.
1. Ingesting large (especially fatty) meals
2. Lying down after a meal
3. Using tobacco
4. Eating any of the delicious foods that relax the lower
esophageal sphincter
a. Chocolate
b. Alcohol
c. Coffee
d. Peppermint
C. Historical features help differentiate esophageal from cardiac
chest pain.
1. A small study analyzed the prevalence of several historical
features in 100 patients in an emergency department with
either esophageal or cardiac chest pain.
2. The differences that reached statistical significance are
listed in Table 8–4. Although the study was small, the data
are instructive.
3. From these data, it is clear that history cannot differentiate
esophageal chest pain from pain due to cardiac ischemia.
That said, pain that is persistent, wakes the patient from
sleep, is positional, and is associated with heartburn or
regurgitation is more likely to be of esophageal origin.
4. It is interesting that only 83% of patients with an
esophageal cause of pain in this study had GI symptoms
(ie, heartburn, regurgitation, dysphagia, or vomiting).
5. Striking were some of the features not significantly differ-
ent between the 2 groups:
a. Radiation to the left arm
b. Exacerbation with exercise
c. Relief with nitroglycerin
6. The effect of nitroglycerin in relieving chest pain has con-
sistently been found to be useless in differentiating anginal
chest pain from esophageal or other causes of chest pain.
Response to nitroglycerin is not helpful in deter-
mining the cause of chest pain.
D. Esophageal pH testing, the gold standard for the diagnosis of
GERD, is seldom necessary.
E. The combination of a suspicious history and consistent endo-
scopic findings has a 97% specificity for GERD.
F. Suggestive symptoms and response to therapy is generally con-
sidered diagnostic.
G. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) should be done when
1. Patients have symptoms of complicated disease
a. Dysphagia
b. Extra-esophageal symptoms
c. Bleeding
d. Weight loss
e. Chest pain of unclear etiology
2. Patients are at risk for Barrett esophagus (long-standing
symptoms of reflux).
3. Patients require long-term therapy
4. Patients respond poorly to appropriate therapy
H. Ambulatory pH monitoring is useful in 2 settings.
1. In patients with symptoms of GERD and a normal endoscopy.
2. To monitor therapy in refractory cases.
Treatment
A. Nonpharmacologic
1. Elevate the entire head of the bed; adding extra pillows
may actually worsen reflux.
2. Avoid lying down for 3 hours after meals.
3. Stop smoking.
4. Stop ingesting high-risk foods and beverages.
a. Fatty foods
b. Chocolate
c. Alcohol
d. Peppermint
e. Coffee
B. Pharmacologic
1. Antacids
2. H2-blockers
Table 8–4. Prevalence of symptoms in patients with
cardiac and esophageal chest pain.
Prevalence (%)
Among
Among 
patients with
patients with
Symptom
cardiac cause
esophageal cause
Lateral radiation
69
11
More than 1 spontaneous
13
50
episode per month
Pain persists as ache
25
78
for several hours
Nighttime wakening
25
61
caused by pain
Provoked by swallowing
6
39
Provoked by
19
61
recumbency or stooping
Variable exercise tolerance
10
39
Pain starts after
4
33
exercise completed
Pain relieved by antacid
10
44
Presence of heartburn
17
78
Presence of regurgitation
17
67
Presence of GI symptoms
46
83
Adapted from Davies HA et al.Angina-like esophageal pain: differentiation from
cardiac pain by history. J Clin Gastroenterol. 1985;7:477–481.
136 /  CHAPTER 8
3. Proton-pump inhibitor
a. First-line therapy in patients with reflux severe enough
to prompt physician visit.
b. Many patients require long-term therapy.
4. Motility agents (such as metoclopramide) are useful in
patients who need adjuvant therapy or who have signifi-
cant symptoms of regurgitation.
5. Surgery
a. Antireflux surgery currently has only a very small role.
b. May be warranted in some patients with particularly
severe disease.
c. One randomized trial has suggested that patients
treated with surgery had a higher mortality rate than
those treated medically at a mean follow-up of about
11 years (number needed to harm [NNH] = 8.3).
Because GERD is a common cause of chest pain, it
is appropriate to prescribe an empiric course of
proton-pump inhibitors after more ominous causes
of chest pain have been ruled out.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Prior to the stress test, Mr. W’s probability of having CAD
was at least 92%. It is important to understand why the
exercise test was done in this case. The diagnosis of coro-
nary disease was essentially made by the history and
physical. The exercise test was meant to guide therapy.
Considering a pretest probability of 92%, and an LR−of
about 0.15 for the exercise test, the posttest probability
is 60%. This is still well above the test threshold for a
potentially fatal disease like CAD.
Despite the results of the stress test, stable angina
was considered more likely than GERD. Mr. W was given
aspirin and a β-blocker and underwent an angiogram the
week after the visit. He was found to have a 90% steno-
sis of the mid left anterior descending artery and under-
went PCI with stent placement.
Before ordering an exercise test, ask yourself why
you are doing it: Are you trying to diagnose CAD
or determine how severe the disease is.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mrs. G is a 68-year-old woman with a history of hyper-
tension who arrives at the emergency department by
ambulance complaining of chest pain that has lasted 6 hours.
Two hours after eating, moderate (5/10) chest discom-
fort developed. She describes it as a burning sensation
beginning in her mid chest and radiating to her back. She
initially attributed the pain to heartburn and used
antacids. Despite multiple doses over 3 hours, there was
no relief. Over the last hour, the pain became very severe
(10/10) with radiation to her back and arms. The pain is
associated with diaphoresis and shortness of breath.
The pain is not pleuritic. She called 911.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. G is experiencing acute, severe, nonpleuritic chest pain. This
presentation is associated with multiple “must not miss” diag-
noses. The acuity of the pain is a pivotal point in this history. MI
with and without ST elevations and unstable angina, as a group
referred to as acute coronary syndromes (ACS), are the most com-
mon life-threatening causes of acute chest pain and need to be
considered first. Aortic dissection also needs to be considered
given the history of hypertension and the radiation of the patient’s
pain to her back. PE is another possible cause even though the
chest pain is not pleuritic. Other alternative, but not life-
threatening, causes of this type of pain are esophageal spasm and
pancreatitis. However, it would be atypical for pancreatitis to
begin so acutely. Table 8–5 lists the differential diagnosis.
2
The patient takes enalapril for hypertension. She lives
alone, is fairly sedentary, and smokes 1 pack of cigarettes
each day. She has an 80 pack year smoking history.
On physical exam, the patient is in moderate distress
related to the pain and is concerned that she is having a
heart attack. Vital signs are temperature, 37.0°C; BP,
156/90 mm Hg in both arms; pulse, 100 bpm; RR, 22 breaths
per minute. Head and neck exam, including jugular and
carotid pulsations, were normal. The lung exam was clear.
Heart exam was notable for a normal S1 and S2 and a soft,
II/VI systolic ejection murmur. Abdominal exam was unre-
markable with no tenderness, hepatosplenomegaly, or bruits.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Acute MI
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation of an acute MI is crushing substernal
chest pressure, diaphoresis, nausea, shortness of breath, and a
CHEST PAIN /  137
feeling of impending doom in a middle-aged man with risk fac-
tors for CAD. More than most other “textbook presentations,”
this description is often inaccurate because it does not take into
account the frequency of MIs in women, younger and older
patients, and the frequency of atypical presentations.
Disease Highlights
A. MI occurs when there is a prolonged failure to perfuse an area
of myocardium leading to cell death.
B. Most commonly occurs when a coronary plaque ruptures
causing thrombosis and subsequent blockage of a coronary
artery.
C. The universal definition of MI describes 5 subtypes of MI
based on their clinical presentation:
1. Spontaneous MI related to ischemia due to a primary
coronary event.
2. MI secondary to ischemia due to either increased oxygen
demand or decreased supply, eg, coronary artery spasm,
anemia, or arrhythmias.
3. Sudden unexpected cardiac death, including cardiac arrest,
often with symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia.
4. MI associated with PCI or stent thrombosis.
5. MI associated with CABG.
D. Acute MIs are classified as either ST segment elevation MI
(STEMI) or non–ST segment elevation MI (NSTEMI).
1. ST elevations signify transmural ischemia or infarction.
2. NSTEMI
a. Are less severe, usually injuring only subendomyocar-
dial tissue
b. Have a higher subsequent risk for STEMI
3. These 2 types of MI are managed somewhat differently
(discussed below).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnostic criteria for acute MI have been clearly estab-
lished. There are 5 criteria that vary somewhat, based partly
on the subtype of MI, and they are shown in Table 8–6. 
B. Clinical findings suggestive of MI
1. About 15% of patients who are admitted to the emergency
department with chest pain are having an MI.
2. Although historical and physical exam features are never
sufficient to diagnose an MI and only rule out an MI in
the lowest risk patients, a few features are fairly predictive
(Table 8–7).
C. ECG findings suggestive of MI
1. All guidelines recommend an ECG be performed within
10 minutes of a patient’s arrival at a healthcare facility
when an MI is suspected.
Patients with chest pain should have an ECG within
10 minutes of arriving at a healthcare facility.
2. Prevalence rates of MI among emergency department
patients with chest pain and various ECG findings follow:
a. New ST elevation of 1 mm: 80%
b. New ST depression or T wave inversion: 20%
c. No new changes in a patient with known CAD: 4%
d. No new changes in a patient without known CAD: 2%
3. Table 8–8 shows the test characteristics for ECG findings
in patients with acute chest pain. Because there are a range
Table 8–6. Criteria for diagnosing acute MI.
1. A rise and fall of cardiac biomarkers (preferably troponin) with at
least one value above the 99th percentile of the URL along with
one of the following:
a. Symptoms of ischemia
b. ECG changes consistent with new ischemia
c. Development of pathologic Q waves
d. Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or
myocardial function.
2. Sudden cardiac death accompanied by ECG changes,
angiographic findings, or autopsy findings supporting MI
as the cause.
3. Elevation of cardiac biomarkers above 3 times the 99th percentile
of the URL in the setting of PCI.
4. Elevation of cardiac biomarkers above 5 times the 99th percentile
of the URL in the setting of CABG along with ECG changes
consistent with MI,angiographic evidence of MI,or imaging
evidence of new loss of viable myocardium of myocardial function.
5. Pathologic evidence of an MI.
CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting; MI, myocardial infarction; PCI, percuta-
neous intervention; URL, upper reference limit.
Table 8–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. G.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Acute MI
Presence of cardiac
ECG
risk factors
Cardiac enzymes
Acute onset
(CK and troponin)
Coronary angiography
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Unstable angina 
Presence of cardiac
ECG
risk factors
Cardiac enzymes
Ischemic symptoms
(CK and troponin)
that are new or
Stress testing
increasing in
Coronary angiography
frequency
Thoracic aortic
Presence of
Transesophageal
aneurysm
hypertension
echocardiography
dissection
Radiation of pain
CT scan
to back
BP differential
Other Alternative
Esophageal spasm
Recurrent chest
Esophageal 
pain, often with
manometry and
radiation to back
exclusion of other
causes
138 /  CHAPTER 8
of numbers from various studies, these numbers should be
treated as estimates.
A patient with chest pain and ≥1-mm ST elevations
in 2 contiguous leads or a new left bundle-branch
block (LBBB) is having an acute MI and should
receive immediate therapy.
D. Cardiac enzymes
1. As is clear from the diagnostic criteria, the presence of car-
diac enzymes define the presence of MI.
2. When an MI is suspected, CK-MB and troponin should
be ordered and processed immediately.
3. These tests are highly reliable in diagnosing MI. (Note
that the definition of MI is based on enzyme results when-
ever they are available).
4. Table 8–9 lists the test characteristics for serial CK-MB
and troponin I according to time after symptom onset.
5. Troponin levels in patients with renal insufficiency
a. Patients with renal insufficiency often have elevated
troponin levels raising the risk of false-positive tests
for MI
b. Patients with elevated troponin levels at baseline will
still have a diagnostic rise and fall with MI
c. In patients with renal failure, higher baseline troponin
levels are predictive of poor cardiovascular outcomes.
E. MI in women
1. Acute MIs present differently in women than in men.
a. Women often report prodromal symptoms such as
fatigue, dyspnea, and insomnia.
b. Chest pain is only present in 57% of women at the
time of MI.
Nearly half of woman having an MI present with a
chief complaint other than chest pain.
c. Dyspnea, weakness, and fatigue are the other common
presenting symptoms.
2. Women who suffer an MI are more likely to die. The cause
of this disparity is multifactorial.
a. Compared with men, women are older when they have
their first MI and have more comorbid conditions.
b. Historically, women have been less likely to undergo
revascularization procedures.
3. Women who do undergo bypass surgery and catheter-
based intervention have higher complication rates than
men who undergo these same procedures.
F. Unrecognized MI
1. Although the combination of symptoms, ECG findings,
and enzymes make most MIs easy to diagnose, about 2%
of patients with acute MI are discharged from the emer-
gency department.
2. Failure to recognize an MI results in worse outcomes for
patients and serious medicolegal issues.
3. MIs most commonly go unrecognized when they present
in unusual ways or in people not expected to have an MI.
4. A patient with an MI or unstable angina who is mistak-
enly discharged is most likely to:
a. Be a woman younger than age 55
b. Be non-white
c. Have a chief complaint of shortness of breath
d. Have a nondiagnostic ECG
5. MI may present without chest pain; patients tend to be
older women or have diabetes mellitus or a history of HF.
6. The most common alternative presentations of MI are
listed below. MI should at least be considered in patients
Table 8–7. Likelihood ratios of historical features and
physical exam findings and the effect on posttest
probability of acute MI.
Feature or Finding
LR+
Posttest Probability1
Radiation to left arm 
2.3
29%
Radiation to right shoulder
2.9
34%
Radiation to both arms
7.1
56%
Nausea and vomiting
1.9
25%
Diaphoresis
2.0
26%
Third heart sound
3.2
36%
Hypotension
3.1
35%
Crackles 
2.1
27%
1Assuming 15% pretest probability.
Adapted from Panju AA et al. The rational clinical examination. Is this
patient having a myocardial infarction? JAMA. 1998;280:1256–1263.
Copyright © 1998. American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
Table 8–8. Test characteristics for ECG findings in patients
with chest pain for the diagnosis of acute MI.1
ECG Finding
LR+
LR−
New ST elevation > 1 mm
5.7–53
New Q wave
5.3–24.8
Any ST elevation
11.2
New Q or ST elevation
11
0.24
New conduction defect
6.3
Any Q wave
3.9
T wave peaking
3.1
Any conduction defect
2.7
Any ECG abnormality
1.3
0.04
1Data are unavailable when not given.
Adapted from Panju AA, et al. The rational clinical examination. Is this
patient having a myocardial infarction? JAMA. 1998;280:1256–1263.
Copyright © 1998. American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
CHEST PAIN /  139
being discharged from the emergency department with
one of these diagnoses.
a. HF
b. Stable angina
c. Arrhythmia
d. Atypical location of pain
e. CNS manifestations (symptoms of cerebrovascular
accident)
f. Nervousness, mania, or psychosis
g. Syncope
h. Weakness
i. Indigestion
MI can present in many different ways. A high
index of suspicion should always be present. Cer-
tain groups of patients (elderly, women, minorities,
diabetics) are most likely to be misdiagnosed.
Treatment
A. A patient with an acute MI needs to receive immediate treat-
ment with antianginals and pain medications. The initial
treatment is outlined below, ranked by the level of evidence
supporting their use:
1. Aspirin, β-blocker 
2. Oxygen
3. Nitroglycerin
4. Although frequently used in NSTEMI and occasionally in
STEMI, there is only weak evidence that unfractionated
or low-molecular-weight heparin is beneficial around the
time of thrombolysis or primary PCI.
5. Other therapy based on presentation
a. Opioids for patients in pain
b. Atropine for patients with pathologic bradycardia
c. Antiarrhythmic agents
B. The next and most important step is opening the culprit ves-
sel. The 2 options are systemic thrombolysis or primary PCI.
1. Although less widely available, primary PCI is the preferred
option.
2. Primary PCI is associated with
a. Lower mortality (even in patients who must be
transferred—albeit quickly—to a hospital with the
capability)
b. Significantly lower risk of serious bleeding complica-
tion. Hemorrhagic stroke is not a potential complica-
tion as it is with systemic thrombolysis.
3. The ability to do primary PCI depends on the presence of
a skilled team of interventional cardiologists who can rap-
idly (within 90 minutes) bring the patient to the catheter-
ization laboratory.
4. Primary PCI with stent placement is probably the most
efficacious treatment.
5. Both primary angioplasty and thrombolysis are most effec-
tive when completed within 12 hours of symptom onset.
C. Once the culprit vessel has been opened, various medications
have been shown to improve survival after acute MI.
1. β-Blockers
2. ACE inhibitors
3. Aspirin
4. Clopidogrel (duration based on intervention and risk of
bleeding)
5. HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, dosed to achieve an LDL
< 70 mg/dL.
6. Glycoprotein IIB/IIIA inhibitors are recommended for
patients with STEMIs and most patients with NSTEMIs.
D. An exercise test is also recommended within 3 weeks of an MI
in patients not undergoing PCI or angiography for informa-
tion on prognosis, functional capacity, and risk stratification.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mrs. G’s ECG shows ST depression in leads II, III, AVL, and
V3–V6. The chest radiograph is normal.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, acute MI? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
The ECG is consistent with cardiac ischemia but does not make
the diagnosis of an acute MI; the diagnosis will be confirmed
when the laboratory results for the enzymes are available. The
abnormal ECG certainly makes the alternative diagnosis, unstable
Table 8–9. Test characteristics for the diagnosis of acute MI by time after symptom onset.
Test
Time Frame
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+
LR−
Serial CK-MB
< 24 h 
99
98
50
0.01
> 24 h
55
97
18
0.46
Troponin I
9 h
95
98
47
0.03
> 24 h 
95
98
47
0.03
Adapted from Black ER. Diagnostic strategies for common medical problems. P. 64. Philadelphia: American College
of Physicians, 1999.
140 /  CHAPTER 8
angina, quite likely if an MI is excluded. Aortic dissections can
cause cardiac ischemia, so this too must remain in the differential.
Alternative Diagnosis: Unstable Angina
Textbook Presentation
Classically, new or worsening symptoms of CAD are the present-
ing manifestations of unstable angina. Unstable angina and an
acute MI without ST elevation may be identical in their presenta-
tion, only differentiated by the presence or absence of myocardial
enzyme elevation.
Disease Highlights
A. Unstable angina is defined as angina that is new, worsening in
severity or frequency, or occurs at rest.
B. Pathophysiology
1. Primarily caused by acute plaque rupture followed by
platelet aggregation.
a. 67% of episodes occur in arteries with < 50% stenosis.
b. 97% occur in arteries with < 75% stenosis.
2. Caused less commonly by changes in oxygen demand or
supply (eg, hyperthyroidism, anemia, high altitude).
C. The diagnosis of unstable angina can be difficult, often
depending on a careful history to differentiate stable from
unstable angina.
D. The clinician seeing a patient with unstable angina or a
NSTEMI must
1. Recognize that the patient has an ACS
2. Institute care
3. Determine the patient’s risk of progressing to an MI or death
4. Treat accordingly
E. Vasospastic angina
1. Vasospastic angina (also called Prinzmetal or variant
angina) is a phenomenon that is related to unstable angina
in presentation.
2. Patients with vasospastic angina periodically have episodes
of cardiac ischemia with ST elevation.
3. The attacks
a. Are often associated with chest pain or other ischemic
symptoms
b. Resolve spontaneously or with nitroglycerin
c. May occur in normal or diseased coronary arteries
d. Can result in MI or death (often secondary to arrhythmia)
e. Often occur at the same time each day
4. Vasospastic angina is usually diagnosed clinically but can
also be diagnosed by inducing it with ergonovine infusion
in the catheterization laboratory.
5. Vasospastic angina is treated effectively with calcium chan-
nel blockers and nitrates.
Vasospastic angina should be considered in patients
whose symptoms are consistent with cardiac
ischemia and occur at about the same time each
day. The diagnosis should also be considered when
transient ST elevations develop.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
The diagnostic considerations for a patient in whom unstable angina
is suspected are 2-fold: diagnose unstable angina or NSTEMI and
risk stratify the patient.
A. Diagnosis
1. There are 3 presentations of unstable angina.
a. Rest angina
b. New onset (< 2 months) angina
c. Increasing angina
2. The American College of Cardiology (ACC) and Ameri-
can Heart Association (AHA) have endorsed a number of
findings that increase the likelihood that a patient’s symp-
toms represent an ACS. These include
a. Chest or left arm pain that reproduces prior angina
b. Known history of CAD
c. Transient mitral regurgitation murmur
d. Hypotension
e. Diaphoresis
f. Pulmonary edema
g. Crackles 
B. Risk stratification
1. Appropriate risk stratification ensures that the patient is
triaged to the proper location for care (ICU, inpatient
ward, home) and eventually receives the most beneficial
therapy. 
2. Patients can be stratified by various validated scores. The
TIMI score is probably most commonly used and is shown
in Table 8–10.
3. Other characteristics that portend high risk are
a. Recurrent angina or ischemia at rest or with low-level
activities despite intensive medical therapy
b. Elevated cardiac biomarkers (TnT or TnI)
c. Signs or symptoms of heart failure or new or worsen-
ing mitral regurgitation
d. High-risk findings from noninvasive testing
Table 8–10. TIMI risk score for unstable angina/NSTEMI.
All cause mortality, new or recurrent MI,
TIMI
or severe or recurrent ischemia requiring
Score1
urgent revascularization within 14 days
0–1
4.7
2
8.3
3
13.2
4
19.9
5
26.2
6–7
40.9
1Patients receive one point for each of the following variables: age ≥65, ≥cardiac
risk factors,prior coronary stenosis of ≥50%,ST segment deviation on admission
ECG, ≥2 anginal events in preceding 24 hours, use of aspirin in previous 7 days,
elevated cardiac biomarkers.
MI, myocardial infarction; NSTEMI, non-ST segment elevation MI.
CHEST PAIN /  141
e. Hemodynamic instability
f. Sustained ventricular tachycardia
g. PCI within 6 months
h. Prior CABG
i. Reduced left ventricular function 
Treatment
A. The following treatments should be started as soon as unsta-
ble angina is suspected:
1. Aspirin
2. β-Blockers
3. Nitrates
B. Patients whose risk stratification identifies them as having a
low risk of death or complications should undergo conserva-
tive management strategy.
1. Enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin
2. Clopidogrel
3. If the patient is stable (no ongoing ischemia, arrhythmias or
decreased ejection fraction on echocardiogram), a stress test
should be done to determine if angiography is indicated.
4. If the stress test finds the patient to be at low risk, the
patient can be discharged with prescriptions for aspirin,
clopidogrel, β-blockers, and an HMG-CoA reductase
inhibitor.
C. Patients found to be at higher risk benefit from an early inva-
sive strategy: 
1. Enoxaparin or unfractionated heparin
2. Clopidogrel or glycoprotein IIb/IIIA inhibitor, or both
3. Angiography
4. Further management is dictated by the findings on angiog-
raphy: PCI, CABG, or medical therapy for coronary disease.  
Alternative Diagnosis: Aortic Dissection
Textbook Presentation
The textbook presentation of an aortic dissection is an older man
with a history of hypertension and possibly atherosclerotic disease
who complains of “tearing” chest or back pain. The pain might be
associated with vascular complications such as syncope, stroke,
cardiac ischemia, or HF secondary to acute aortic regurgitation.
On physical exam, there is asymmetry in the upper extremity BPs,
and the chest radiograph shows a widened mediastinum.
Disease Highlights
A. Dissection begins with a tear in the aortic intima allowing
blood to dissect the aorta between the intima and media.
B. The primary risk factors for aortic dissection are hypertension
and atherosclerosis, present in 72% and 31% of patients,
respectively. Other risk factors include
1. Known aortic aneurysm (present in 16% of patients)
a. Aortic aneurysms are usually detected while they are
asymptomatic on a chest radiograph.
b. They may also present with aortic regurgitation, pain,
or through impingement on other structures such as
the trachea, esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerve.
2. Prior aortic dissection (6%)
3. Diabetes (5%)
4. Marfan syndrome (5%)
C. An additional risk factor for aortic dissection is cocaine use.
This is associated with dissections in younger patients
(mean age 41).
In addition to MI, thoracic aortic dissection should
be considered in the differential of a young hyperten-
sive patient who has chest pain after using cocaine.
D. The symptoms of dissection include pain as well as symptoms
of vascular complications of the dissection. The type of com-
plication depends on what type of dissection occurs.
E. Type A dissections involve the ascending aorta with or with-
out the descending aorta.
1. Account for about 60% of dissections
2. Carry a mortality of about 35%
3. May be associated with
a. Acute aortic insufficiency
b. Myocardial ischemia due to coronary occlusion
c. Neurologic deficits
d. Cardiac tamponade due to hemopericardium
F. Type B dissections involve only the descending aorta and are
associated with a mortality of about 15%.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of aortic dissection is reliably difficult. There
are no signs or symptoms that are consistently associated with
very high or very low LRs.
B. A study of 464 patients with aortic dissection helps describe
the common presenting signs and symptoms of people with
this diagnosis. 
1. The demographic findings were not surprising:
a. Mean age ≈63 years
b. 73% of patients had hypertension
2. The presenting signs and symptoms were notable for the
infrequency of some classic findings.
a. Pulse deficit was noted in only 15% of patients, syncope
in 9%, cerebrovascular accident in 5%, and HF in 7%.
b. Some of the more common symptoms are shown in
Table 8–11.
c. Chest radiograph and ECG were found to be very
insensitive diagnostic tools.
The aorta is normal on the chest film in about 40%
of patients with a dissection of the thoracic aorta.
C. Another study stratified patients by 3 independent predictors
of aortic dissection: aortic type pain (pain of acute onset or
tearing or ripping character), aortic or mediastinal widening
on chest radiograph, and pulse or BP differentials.
1. Low-risk patients had none of the characteristics.
a. Only 7% of these patients had a dissection
b. The test characteristics of these findings for excluding
dissection were sensitivity, 96%; specificity, 48%; LR+,
1.85; LR−, 0.08.
142 /  CHAPTER 8
2. Intermediate-risk patients had only consistent pain or a
consistent chest radiograph. Between 30% and 40% of
these patients had a dissection.
3. High-risk patients had pulse or BP differentials or any
combination of the 3 of the variables.
a. > 84% of these patients had a dissection.
b. The test characteristics of these findings for predicting
dissection were sensitivity, 76%; specificity, 91%; LR+,
8.4; LR−, 0.26.
4. The test characteristics for pulse or blood pressure differen-
tials in a patient in whom aortic dissection is suspected were
sensitivity, 37%; specificity, 99%; LR+, 37; LR−, 0.64.
D. Summarizing the clinical diagnosis of aortic dissection
1. Patients with dissections are likely to have a history of
hypertension and experience severe, acute pain. 
2. Patients with chest pain are unlikely to have a dissection if
they do not have any of the following: 
a. Acute or tearing or ripping pain
b. Aortic or mediastinal widening
c. Asymmetric pulse or BPs
E. The gold standard for diagnosis is angiography but most
patients undergo only noninvasive tests.
F. All the commonly used noninvasive tests have sensitivities and
specificities above 95%.
G. The most commonly used tests are CT scans and trans-
esophageal echocardiography.
H. Angiography is recommended to help guide therapy if there is
evidence of organ ischemia.
Treatment
A. Because dissection is associated with extremely high mortal-
ity, the ideal is to identify and repair the aneurysm prior to
rupture.
B. Thoracic aortic aneurysms 
1. When aneurysms are detected prior to rupture, the goal of
therapy is to slow their growth and operate when the
aneurysm reaches a certain size.
2. Patients with aneurysms should have tight BP control.
3. Patients should be closely monitored for increasing
aneurysm size.
4. Indications for surgery are based on the size of the aneurysm
a. 5.5 cm for ascending aneurysms
b. 6.5 cm for descending aneurysms
c. Rapid growth
5. There is growing enthusiasm for using intravascular stents
to repair some aneurysms.
C. Thoracic aortic dissection
1. Dissection of the thoracic aorta is a medical emergency.
2. Type A dissections are generally operated on immediately.
3. Type B dissections usually are managed medically.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mrs. G’s initial troponin was elevated at 3.5 ng/mL with
a CK of 750 units/L and positive MB fraction. The final
diagnosis is NSTEMI. Following treatment in the emer-
gency department with oxygen, β-blockers, nitrates, and
enoxaparin, she was taken directly to the cardiac
catheterization laboratory. There she was found to have
a left dominant system and an acute thrombosis of a
branch of the left circumflex artery. This was opened with
intracoronary thrombolysis and a stent was placed.
The patient’s troponin and CK make the diagnosis of an acute MI.
It should be realized that the presence of an MI does not rule out
dissection of the thoracic aorta. Between 3% and 5% of patients
with dissections have associated MIs. Even before the catheteriza-
tion results, the subacute onset of the pain, the normal chest film,
the lack of “tearing pain,” and symmetric pulses made aortic dis-
section unlikely.
2
Four days after her MI, Mrs. G was discharged with pre-
scriptions for the following medications:
1. Atorvastatin 80 mg
2. Enalapril 20 mg
3. Atenolol 100 mg
4. Aspirin 81 mg
4. Clopidogrel 75 mg
FP
Table 8–11. Prevalence of various findings and symptoms in
patients with thoracic aortic aneurysm dissection (type A).
Finding or Symptom 
Prevalence 
Abrupt onset pain
85%
Chest pain
79%
Back pain
47%
Severe or worst ever pain
90%
Sharp pain
62%
Tearing pain
51%
Normal chest film 
11%
Widened mediastinum
63%
Normal mediastinum and aortic contour
17%
Nonspecific ST-segment or T-wave changes
43%
Adapted from Hagan PG et al. The International Registry of Acute Aortic Dis-
section (IRAD): new insights into an old disease. JAMA. 2000;283:897–903.
Copyright © 2000. American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
CHEST PAIN /  143
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mr. H is a 31-year-old man, previously in excellent health
who arrives at the emergency department complaining of
chest pain. He reports that the pain began 10 days ear-
lier. It was initially mild but has become more severe. The
pain is accompanied by mild cough and shortness of
breath. Five days earlier, he had come to the emergency
department and musculoskeletal chest pain was diag-
nosed; he was given nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and discharged.
Since the pain has become more severe, it has become
pleuritic. He says it is located over the right lateral lower
chest wall. His dyspnea is still only mild. He also has noted
low-grade fevers with temperatures running about 38°C.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
This is a healthy young man with an acute illness. He reports pleu-
ritic chest pain, cough, dyspnea, and fevers. The acuity of the
symptoms as well as the pleuritic nature of the pain are pivotal
points in this case. The first diagnoses to consider are infectious
diseases that could cause pleuritic chest pain. Pneumonia or pleu-
ral effusion could cause these symptoms, either individually or as
part of the same process. (Pleural effusions will be discussed below
while pneumonia will be diagnosed in Chapter 9). Pericarditis can
also cause pleuritic chest pain and can be associated with fevers.
PE is a classic cause of pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath
and may be associated with fever (see Chapter 14, Dyspnea).
Intra-abdominal processes, such as subdiaphragmatic abscess
should be kept in mind as causes of pleuritic chest pain. The com-
bination of fever, dyspnea, and chest pain places pneumonia or
pleural effusion at the top of the list. Table 8–12 lists the differen-
tial diagnosis.
3
During further history taking, Mr. H reports no radiation
of the pain. He denies abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting,
or change in appetite. Deep breathing and sudden move-
ments tend to worsen the pain. There are no other pal-
liative or provocative features.
On physical exam, Mr. H is a healthy appearing man
who appears in mild distress. He moves somewhat gin-
gerly because of the pain and is dyspneic. He coughs
occasionally during the history. This causes great pain.
Vital signs are temperature, 38.9°C; BP, 130/84 mm Hg;
pulse, 110 bpm; RR, 26 breaths per minute. Head and neck
exam is normal; there is no jugular venous distention.
Lung exam is notable for dullness to percussion and
decreased breath sounds at the right base. There is an 
area of egophony just superior to the decreased breath
sounds and normal breath sounds superior to this. The
left chest is clear. Heart exam is normal as are the
abdomen and extremities.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Pleural Effusion
Textbook Presentation
Small effusions are usually asymptomatic while large effusions reli-
ably cause dyspnea with or without pleuritic chest pain. Presenta-
tion depends on the cause of the effusion. Parapneumonic effu-
sions will be accompanied by the signs and symptoms of
pneumonia while neoplastic effusions will usually present with
dyspnea alone and symptoms of the underlying cancer. Pleural
effusions related to rheumatologic disease are usually accompanied
by signs of the specific illness. Physical exam reveals dullness to
percussion and decreased breath sounds over the area of effusion. 
Disease Highlights
A. Pathophysiology of pleural effusions vary by etiology but may
be due to 1 or any combination of the following:
1. Increased capillary permeability
2. Increased hydrostatic pressure
3. Decreased oncotic pressure
Table 8–12. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. H.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Pleural effusion
Cough and shortness
Chest radiograph
or pneumonia
of breath with
Thoracentesis for
associated physical
pleural effusion
exam findings
Active Alternative  
Pericarditis
Pain relieved by
ECG
leaning forward
Echocardiogram
Friction rub 
ECG changes
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Pulmonary
Risk factors 
Ventilation-
embolism
Tachycardia
perfusion scan
Helical CT
Pulmonary
angiogram
Other Alternative
Subdiaghragmatic
Intra-abdominal 
Abdominal 
abscess
process
ultrasound 
Fevers
CT
144 /  CHAPTER 8
4. Increased negative intrapleural pressure
5. Disruption of pulmonary lymphatics
B. The differential diagnosis of a pleural effusion is enormous.
The most common causes with their approximate yearly inci-
dence are listed in Table 8–13.
C. The most useful way of organizing the differential diagnosis is
by whether the effusion is exudative or transudative.
1. Exudative effusions are caused by increased capillary per-
meability or disruption of pulmonary lymphatics.
2. Transudative effusions are caused by increased hydrostatic
pressure, decreased oncotic pressure, or increased negative
intrapleural pressure.
D. Table 8-14 lists some common transudative and exudative
effusions.
E. Exudative effusions commonly complicate the following
diagnoses:
1. Pneumonia
a. Any effusion associated with pneumonia, lung abscess, or
bronchiectasis is considered a parapneumonic effusion.
b. Empyemas are parapneumonic effusions that have
become infected.
c. Empyemas, and certain parapneumonic effusions
called complicated parapneumonic effusions, are more
likely to form fibrotic, pleural peels. The diagnostic cri-
teria for these types of effusions are given below.
d. Parapneumonic effusions accompany 40% of all pneu-
monias while empyemas occur 2% of the time, at most.
e. Effusions are more likely to form and more likely to
become infected if the treatment of the underlying
pneumonia is delayed.
f. The bacteriology of parapneumonic effusions is shown
in Table 8–15.
2. Malignancy
a. Most common cancers leading to effusions are
(1) Lung
(2) Breast
(3) Lymphoma
(4) Leukemia
(5) Adenocarcinoma of unknown primary
b. The effusion may occur as the presenting symptom of
the cancer or occur in patients with a previously diag-
nosed malignancy.
c. The presence of a malignant effusion is generally a very
poor prognostic sign.
3. PE
a. Effusions are present in 26–56% of patients with PE.
b. Effusions accompany PE most commonly in patients
with pleuritic pain or hemoptysis.
4. Viral infections
a. Considered to be a common cause of effusions
b. Difficult to diagnose; definitive diagnosis is rarely made
c. Usually diagnosed in patients with febrile or nonfebrile
illness with transient effusion and negative work-up.
d. Other clues such as atypical lymphocytes, monocytosis,
and leukopenia are helpful in diagnosing viral infection.
Table 8–13. The incidences of several causes of pleural
effusion.
Etiology
Incidence
HF
500,000
Pneumonia
300,000
Malignancy
200,000
Pulmonary embolism
150,000
Viral disease
100,000
Coronary artery bypass surgery
60,000
Cirrhosis with ascites
50,000
Less common but prevalent causes, including uremia, tuberculosis,
chylothorax, and rheumatologic disease (RA and SLE)
HF, heart failure; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Data from Light RW. Clinical practice. Pleural effusion. N Engl J Med.
2002;346:1971–1977. Copyright © 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society.
All Rights Reserved.
Table 8–14. Common transudative and exudative
effusions.
Transudative Effusions
Exudative Effusions
Heart failure
Parapneumonic effusions
Cirrhosis with ascites
Malignancy
Pulmonary embolism (1/4)
Pulmonary embolism (3/4)
Nephrotic syndrome
Viral infections
Severe hypoalbuminemia
Post CABG
Subdiaghragmatic infections
and inflammatory states
Chylothorax, uremia, connective
tissue diseases
CABG, coronary artery bypass grafting.
Table 8–15. Bacteriology of parapneumonic effusions.
Percentage of 
Percentage of 
pneumonias with 
effusions that are
Bacteria
effusion
empyemas
Streptococcus
40–60
< 5
pneumoniae
Anaerobes
35
90
Staphylococcus aureus
40
20
Haemophilus influenzae
50
20
Escherichia coli
~50
~99
CHEST PAIN /  145
A pleural effusion should only be diagnosed as viral
in an appropriate clinical setting when more serious
causes of effusion have been ruled out.
5. CABG surgery
a. Pleural effusions develop in up to 90% of patients
immediately following CABG.
b. Can be left sided or bilateral
c. Usually resolve spontaneously
6. Other diseases that are not uncommon causes of pleural
effusions include
1. Uremia
2. Tuberculosis (TB)
3. Chylothorax
4. Rheumatologic disease (eg, rheumatoid arthritis and
systemic lupus erythematosus)
F. The most common causes of transudative effusions are
1. HF
a. Most common cause of transudative effusions in the
United States
b. Effusions are accompanied by other findings of left
heart failure.
c. Effusions are usually small and resolve with diuresis alone.
d. Effusions are usually bilateral; unilateral effusions can
occur, but they are less common.
2. Cirrhosis with ascites
a. About 6% of patients with ascites have pleural effusions.
b. Effusion is thought to be secondary to ascites moving
into the thorax via defects in the diaphragm.
c. Extremely rare to have pleural effusions on the basis of
cirrhosis without ascites.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of a pleural effusion itself is based on the recog-
nition of fluid in the pleural space on physical exam.
1. The sensitivity and specificity of dullness to chest percus-
sion for detecting pleural effusions is very good.
a. Sensitivity, 96%; specificity, 95%
b. LR+, 18.6; LR−, 0.04
2. There is often an area of egophony just superior to the
effusion.
3. Once detected, a pleural effusion is confirmed on chest
radiograph, ultrasound, or other form of chest imaging.
B. After diagnosing a pleural effusion, the next step is to deter-
mine the cause. If the effusion is clinically significant (usually
considered > 1 cm on a chest film), it should be sampled.
1. A cause should be determined for any new pleural effusion.
2. The only exception to this is in the case of HF. If the clin-
ical suspicion for HF as the sole cause of the effusion is
high, the effusion can be observed while the patient is
treated. If the effusion persists or the diagnosis becomes
unclear, the effusion should then be sampled.
Pleural effusions are abnormal; any new pleural
effusion should be evaluated.
C. The first step in determining the cause of an effusion is to dif-
ferentiate transudative from exudative effusions.
D. Light’s criteria are the most widely used criteria for differenti-
ating transudative from exudative effusions.
1. An effusion is considered to be an exudate if any of the fol-
lowing 3 criteria are met: 
a. Pleural fluid protein/serum protein > 0.5
b. Pleural fluid LDH/serum LDH > 0.6 
c. Pleural fluid LDH > 2/3 upper limit of normal for
serum LDH
2. The test characteristics for these are
a. Sensitivity, 98%; specificity, 83%
b. LR+, 5.76; LR−, 0.02
3. The most specific test for an exudative effusion is a differ-
ence between the serum albumin and pleural fluid albu-
min of < 1.2 g/dL (LR+ 10.88). 
E. Once the diagnosis of a transudate or exudate is made, vari-
ous other tests will help determine the exact diagnosis. Besides
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and protein, certain tests are
routinely sent when pleural fluid is sampled.
1. Positive Gram stain or culture makes the diagnosis of an
empyema.
2. Fluid pH. A low pH (< 7.2) is commonly seen with
a. Empyemas
b. Malignant effusions
c. Esophageal rupture
3. Cell count
a. Neutrophil count over 50% argues for an acute process
(1) Parapneumonic effusion (sensitivity = 91%)
(2) PE
b. High neutrophil count is rarely seen in other diseases,
such as TB and malignancy.
c. Lymphocyte predominant exudative effusions are
almost always caused by TB or malignancy (positive
predictive value = 97%).
d. Pleural fluid eosinophilia is a nonspecific finding. It is seen
frequently with inflammatory diseases, pneumococcal pneu-
monia, viral pleuritis, TB, and even repeated thoracentesis.
e. A low mesothelial cell count (< 5%) count is highly
suggestive of TB.
4. Cytology
a. Highly specific for the diagnosis of cancer
b. Sensitivity is 70% at best, with significantly lower val-
ues for some cancers.
F. Other tests are done if the clinical suspicion for certain dis-
eases is high.
1. Tuberculous effusions
a. Usually suspected based on clinical presentation and
pleural fluid lymphocytosis
b. The sensitivity of commonly used tests for the diagno-
sis of tuberculous pleurisy are
(1) Pleural fluid culture, 42%
(2) Pleural biopsy culture, 64%
(3) Pleural biopsy histology (caseating granulomas),
70–80%
FP
146 /  CHAPTER 8
(4) Histology and pleural tissue culture > 90%
(5) Sputum culture, 20–50%
c. A recent meta-analysis has shown that interferon-γ levels
in the pleural fluid are very useful for diagnosing tuber-
culous pleurisy with the following test characteristics:
(1) Sensitivity, 89%; specificity, 95%
(2) LR+, 23.45; LR−, 0.11
2. Glucose levels < 60 mg/dL are helpful and are seen in
a. Empyema
b. TB
c. Rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus
3. Triglycerides are greater than 110 mg/dL in patients with
chylothorax. The fluid is also a milky white.
4. Thoracoscopy with pleural biopsy often used when suspi-
cion for malignancy is high and cytology is negative.
Pleural fluid testing should always include LDH,
protein, albumin, pH, and cell count. Other tests,
such as cytology, are often sent.
Treatment 
A. Pleural effusions are treated by treating the underlying disease
(eg, pneumonia, uremia, and HF). Specific treatment of the
effusion is called for in certain circumstances.
B. Complicated parapneumonic effusions
1. Evacuation by chest tube drainage prevents pleural scar-
ring and the development of restrictive pleural disease.
2. Indications for chest tube placement are
a. Purulent fluid or positive Gram stain
b. pH < 7.2
c. LDH > 1000 units/L
d. Glucose < 40 mg/dL
e. Small effusions that are close to the above 3 cutoffs can
sometimes be carefully monitored.
C. Malignant pleural effusions
1. Usually managed by treating the underlying disease and
periodic therapeutic thoracentesis.
2. If thoracentesis is required frequently and the patient’s life
expectancy is long, there are a number of options among
which are
a. Pleurodesis, obliteration of the pleural space by the
installation of a chemical irritant
b. Catheter drainage, in which a semi-permanent catheter
is placed to allow constant drainage of the effusion.
3. Pleurodesis is usually done with talc.
D. Chylothorax
1. Caused by nontraumatic (primarily lymphoma) or trau-
matic (usually surgical) disruption of the thoracic duct.
2. In nontraumatic cases, the underlying disease is treated.
3. In both nontraumatic and traumatic disease, the pleural
space is evacuated with chest tube drainage.
4. A diet of medium chain fatty acids or a trial of total par-
enteral nutrition is used to decrease flow through the tho-
racic duct.
5. Pleurodesis and surgical management reserved for refrac-
tory cases.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
The patient’s physical exam findings are consistent with a
pleural effusion. A posteroanterior, lateral, and decubitus
chest film were done that revealed an effusion. The effu-
sion was tapped and yielded pale, turbid fluid. The initial
results are glucose, < 20 mg/dL; LDH = 38,400 units/L;
protein = 4.4 g/dL; fluid pH, 6.2; RBC, 3200/mcL; WBC,
144,000/mcL; Gram stain positive for gram-positive cocci
in pairs and chains. Serum values at the time included
total protein of 7.8 g/dL and LDH 141 units/L.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, pleural effusion? Have
you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
Mr. H has a pleural effusion. Given the size of the effusion on the
chest film, a thoracentesis was clearly indicated. The results of the
tap are diagnostic. The fluid is an exudate and the low glucose, low
pH, high WBC, and positive Gram stain make the diagnosis of an
empyema.
It is worth noting that Mr. H’s previous diagnosis of muscu-
loskeletal chest pain was incorrect. A chest radiograph done on his
previous visit to the emergency department may have made the
correct diagnosis and treatment could, potentially, have prevented
the development of an empyema. There are many indications for
chest films, one is to diagnose a cause for chest pain.
A chest film should be performed in any patient
with chest pain and no clear diagnosis.
Alternative Diagnoses: Acute Pericarditis
Textbook Presentation
Acute pericarditis typically presents in young adults, with 1 week
of viral symptoms and chest pain that improves with leaning for-
ward. Physical exam reveals a 3-part friction rub. ECG reveals ST
elevations and PR depressions in all leads.
Disease Highlights
A. Although the causes of pericarditis are extremely varied, most
(85–90%) are considered idiopathic or due to an undiag-
nosed virus. The common causes are listed below:
1. Viral pericarditis is primarily caused by coxsackie, echo,
and adeno viruses.
2. Other infectious causes of pericarditis include TB (histor-
ically the most common) and HIV and related diseases.
3. Pericarditis may occur after myocardial injury (post MI
and postcardiac surgery).
4. Rheumatologic causes include systemic lupus erythemato-
sus and rheumatoid arthritis.
CHEST PAIN /  147
5. Procainamide and hydralazine are among the drugs that
can cause it.
6. Neoplastic causes
a. Malignancy metastatic to the pericardium
b. Pericarditis can also be caused by exposure of the chest
to radiation.
7. Uremia
B. About 50% of patients with uremia have pericardial effusions.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of pericarditis is made based on a pericardial
friction rub or in a patient with chest pain and characteristic
ECG findings. 
1. History
a. Chest pain is almost always present.
b. The pain is usually pleuritic.
c. It classically radiates to the trapezius ridge.
d. Pain improves with sitting and worsens with reclining.
2. Physical exam
FP
a. The pericardial friction rub is insensitive but nearly
100% specific; it is diagnostic of pericarditis.
b. The rub is usually triphasic.
(1) Triphasic in 58% of cases
(2) Biphasic in 24% of cases
(3) Monophasic in 18% of cases
c. Although the physical exam is insensitive for effusions,
it is good for detecting tamponade.
(1) Sensitivity of jugular venous distention to detect
tamponade is 100%.
(2) Sensitivity of tachycardia to detect tamponade is
100%.
(3) Pulsus paradoxus > 12
(a) Sensitivity, 98%; specificity, 83%
(b) LR+, 5.9; LR−, 0.03
3. ECG
a. The ECG most commonly shows widespread ST ele-
vations and PR depressions. This finding is highly spe-
cific but the sensitivity is only about 60%.
b. The differentiation of pericarditis from acute MI on
ECG can be difficult. Some of the key differentiating fac-
tors are
(1) ST elevation in pericarditis is usually diffuse while
in MI it is usually localized.
(2) ST elevations in MI are often associated with
reciprocal changes.
(3) PR depression is very uncommon in acute MI.
(4) Q waves are not present with pericarditis.
Pericarditis can mimic MI. The presence of a rub
and careful analysis of the ECG should enable their
distinction.
4. Other diagnostic tests
a. An echocardiogram is always done when pericardi-
tis has been diagnosed to evaluate the presence of a
significant pericardial effusion and exclude the
presence of tamponade.
b. Cardiac enzymes are frequently positive and are there-
fore not helpful for distinguishing the chest pain of
pericarditis from that of cardiac ischemia.
B. Once the diagnosis of pericarditis is made, the cause needs to
be determined.
1. Because most pericarditis is either idiopathic or viral,
requiring only supportive care, extensive work-up is gen-
erally not indicated.
2. After a thorough history, most experts recommend only a
few diagnostic tests.
a. Chest radiograph 
b. BUN and creatinine
c. PPD
d. Antinuclear antibodies
e. Blood cultures
3. More extensive evaluation is appropriate for patients with
refractory or recurrent disease. Even the most invasive
diagnostic studies, pericardiocentesis and pericardial
biopsy, are generally not helpful. Their diagnostic yield is
only about 20%.
Treatment
A. Because most patients have viral or idiopathic disease, the
treatment of acute pericarditis is supportive.
1. NSAIDs are the treatment of choice, usually providing
good pain relief.
2. The addition of colchicine may improve response to ther-
apy and decrease rates of recurrent disease.
B. Prednisone is effective in patients with refractory disease but
only after excluding the presence of diseases (such as TB) that
are potentially exacerbated by corticosteroids.
C. Pericardiocentesis is required in patients with tamponade.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mr. H underwent chest tube drainage of the effusion.
Three tubes were placed with thoracoscopic guidance
because the effusion was loculated. He was given a third-
generation cephalosporin while sensitivities of his pre-
sumed pneumococcus were pending. He became afebrile
after 2 days of antibiotics and chest tube drainage. The
tube output declined over 5 days and the tubes were
removed on day 6. Total output was about 3 L.
He was discharged and given oral antibiotics for 6 weeks
for treatment of an empyema.
Empyemas are a medical emergency. They are
closed space infections that need to be drained in
order to cure them and preserve future lung func-
tion. As soon as one is detected, steps should be
taken to drain it.
148 /  CHAPTER 8
REFERENCES 
Abrams J. Clinical practice. Chronic stable angina. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(24):
2524–33.
Anderson JL, Adams CD, Antman EM, et al. ACC/AHA 2007 Guidelines for the
Management of Patients With Unstable Angina/Non ST-Elevation Myocar-
dial Infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50(7):e1–157.
Antman EM, Anbe DT, Armstrong PW, et al. ACC/AHA guidelines for the man-
agement of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2004;44(3):E1–E211.
Jiang J, Shi HZ, Liang QL, Qin SM, Qin XJ. Diagnostic value of interferon-gamma
in tuberculous pleurisy: a metaanalysis. Chest. 2007;131(4):1133–41.
Kimble LP, McGuire DB, Dunbar SB, et al. Gender differences in pain character-
istics of chronic stable angina and perceived physical limitation in patients
with coronary artery disease. Pain. 2003;101:45–53.
Klompas M. Does this patient have an acute thoracic aortic dissection? JAMA.
2002;287(17):2262–72.
Light RW. Parapneumonic effusions and empyema. Clin Chest Med.
1985;6(1):55–62.
McGee SR. Evidence-based physical diagnosis. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2001.
Permanyer-Miralda G, Sagrista-Sauleda J, Soler-Soler J. Primary acute pericardial
disease: a prospective series of 231 consecutive patients. Am J Cardiol.
1985;56(10):623–30.
Spodick DH. Pericardial friction. Characteristics of pericardial rubs in fifty consec-
utive, prospectively studied patients. N Engl J Med. 1968;278(22):1204-7.
Thygesen K, Alpert JS, White HD. Universal definition of myocardial infarction.
Circulation. 2007;116(22):2634–53.
von Kodolitsch Y, Schwartz AG, Nienaber CA. Clinical prediction of acute aortic
dissection. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(19):2977–82.
Williams SV, Fihn SD, Gibbons RJ. Guidelines for the management of patients
with chronic stable angina: diagnosis and risk stratification. Ann Intern Med.
2001;135(7):530–47.
Yeghiazarians Y, Braunstein JB, Askari A, Stone PH. Unstable angina pectoris. N
Engl J Med. 2000;342(2):101–14.
?
9
149
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Ms. L is a 22-year-old woman who comes to your office in
August complaining of cough and fever. She reports that
she was in her usual state of health until 3 days ago
when a cough developed. Two days ago, a low-grade fever
(37.2°C) developed, which increased to 38.8°C yester-
day. She reports that her sputum is yellow and that she
has no chest pain or shortness of breath.
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS
The framework for the differential diagnosis of acute respiratory
complaints is anatomic and microbiologic. Although there are a
myriad of viral and bacterial (and occasional mycobacterial) infec-
tions that infect the respiratory tree, a practical approach addresses
3 issues:
1. Where is the infection (sinuses, tracheobronchial tree,
alveoli)?
2. Will the patient benefit from antibiotics?
3. Among patients with pneumonia, clinicians must separate the
common community-acquired pneumonias (CAPs) from the
less common but important pneumonias due to aspiration,
tuberculosis (TB), and opportunistic infections. Diagnostic
and treatment algorithms that summarize the approach to
patients with acute respiratory infections appear at the end of
the chapter. (see Figures 9–3 and 9–4)
Differential Diagnosis of Acute Cough
and Congestion
A. Common cold
B. Sinusitis
C. Bronchitis
D. Influenza
E. Pneumonia
1. CAP
2. Aspiration pneumonia
3. TB
4. Opportunistic (eg, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia
[PCP])
1
On physical exam, Ms. L is in no acute distress. Vital
signs are RR, 18 breaths per minute; BP, 110/72 mm Hg;
pulse, 92 bpm; temperature, 38.6°C. Pharynx is unre-
markable; lung exam reveals normal breath sounds with-
out crackles, dullness, bronchophony, or egophony.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for Ms. L includes acute bronchitis,
influenza, aspiration pneumonia, and CAP. Ms. L’s high fever is a
pivotal feature of this case. Acute bronchitis is not usually associ-
ated with significant fever (unless caused by influenza). Influenza
can cause high fevers and chest symptoms but almost always
occurs between December and May. Therefore, despite Ms. L’s
normal lung exam, the high fever raises the possibility of CAP and
makes this the leading diagnosis. Table 9–1 lists the differential
diagnosis.
A high fever should raise the suspicion of pneumonia.
Influenza occurs from December to May in the
northern hemisphere; it is highly unlikely at other
times. 
1
Ms. L reports drinking only an occasional glass of wine
and denies recent intoxication, loss of consciousness, or
substance abuse. She reports no travel history and no
sick contacts.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis of CAP? If not, what other infor-
mation do you need?
I have a patient with acute respiratory complaints
of cough and congestion.
How do I determine the cause? 
Leading Hypothesis: CAP
Textbook Presentation
Productive cough and fever are often the presenting symptoms in
patients with pneumonia. Symptoms may worsen over days or
develop abruptly. Pleuritic chest pain, shortness of breath, chills,
and rigors may also develop. 
Disease Highlights
A. Most common cause of infectious death in the United States
B. Most common identified pathogens
1. Streptococcus pneumoniae
2. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
a. More common in younger patients
b. Cannot be distinguished from other pyogenic infec-
tions based on clinical presentation or chest radiograph
3. Haemophilus influenzae
4. Chlamydia
5. Influenza (and other viruses)
6. Polymicrobial infection
7. Legionella
8. Staphylococcus aureus infection may develop post influenza.
C. 3.4% of pneumonias are associated with underlying malignancy 
D. Complications
1. Respiratory failure
2. Death
3. Empyema (See Chapter 8, Chest Pain)
E. Prognosis is good overall.
1. 8% hospitalization rate
2. 95% radiographic cure in 1 month
3. Mortality 1.2%
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis of pneumonia
1. Diagnosis is usually clinical, based on constellation of
cough, fever, and infiltrate on chest film
2. Prevalence of symptoms in patients with pneumonia
a. Cough, 96%
b. Fever, 81% but 53% in the elderly
Elderly patients with pneumonia often do not have
a fever. Clinicians should have a low threshold for
obtaining a chest radiograph in elderly patients or
in patients with COPD with cough or with mental
status changes.
c. Dyspnea, 46–66%
d. Pleuritic chest pain, 37–50%
e. Chills, 59%
f. Headache, 58%
3. Physical exam
a. No single finding is very sensitive. Therefore, the
absence of any single finding does not rule out pneu-
monia (Table 9–2).
(1) Neither a normal lung exam nor the absence of
fever rule out pneumonia (LR–, 0.6 and 0.8,
respectively). 
A normal lung exam does not rule out pneumonia.
(2) Normal vital signs make pneumonia less likely (LR
0.18).
(3) Combination of normal vital signs and normal
chest exam make pneumonia highly unlikely (95%
sensitive, LR 0.09).
150 /  CHAPTER 9
Table 9–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. L.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
CAP
Cough
Chest radiograph 
Shortness of breath
Blood culture 
High fever
Sputum Gram stain
Crackles or dullness
and culture
on lung exam
(occasionally)
Active Alternatives-Most Common
Acute bronchitis
Cough
Chest radiograph
Absence of high fever
(if abnormal lung
Normal lung exam
exam, dyspnea or
high fever)
Influenza
Sudden onset 
Diagnosis is usually
High fever
clinical;
Severe myalgias
Direct
December to May
immunofluorescence
or ELISA can be used
Aspiration
Impaired mentation
Chest radiograph
pneumonia
(dementia, prior
stroke, substance
abuse)
ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
Table 9–2. Likelihood ratios for physical findings in
pneumonia.
Finding
LR+
LR−
Fever > 37.8°C
4.4
0.8 
Any chest finding
1.3–3.01
0.6
Normal vital signs 
1.2
0.18
HR < 100 bpm, temperature
≤37.8°C, RR ≤20 breaths per minute
Normal vital signs and lung exam
2.2
0.09
Egophony
8.6
1.0
Crackles
2.7
0.9
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  151
FP
b. Egophony is fairly specific and significantly increases
the likelihood of pneumonia when present (LR+ 8.6).
4. WBC > 10,400 cells/mcL: LR+, 3.7; LR−, 0.6 
5. Chest film
a. Sensitivity is lower in dehydrated patients.
b. Compared with high-resolution chest CT scan, chest
film sensitivity is 69%. 
A normal chest radiograph does not rule out pneu-
monia when the pretest probability is high (ie, a
patient with cough, fever and crackles), and antibi-
otics should still be administered. 
c. 94% of infiltrates are in the lower and middle regions.
CAP rarely affects the upper lobes; consider TB or
aspiration pneumonia when upper lobe involve-
ment is seen.
6. Determining the etiologic agent
a. A variety of tests, including sputum culture, sputum
Gram stain, blood culture and urinary antigen tests for
pneumococcus and Legionella, can help determine the
pathogen in CAP. 
b. The yield of these tests in outpatients with CAP is low
and routine testing is optional in outpatients.
c. Sputum cultures are often unreliable due to contami-
nation by oral flora. 
(1) Normal flora should not be misinterpreted to
mean no infection. 
(2) When positive, sputum cultures can help deter-
mine the resistance pattern.
d. Sputum Gram stains are also often unreliable due to
poor quality, preparation, and interpretation. 
(1) One study reported that only 14% of hospitalized
patients had an adequate specimen with a domi-
nant organism. 
(2) One study reported positive sputum Gram stains
in 63–80% of patients with pneumococcal bac-
teremia.
e. Blood cultures are positive in 5–14% of patients.
f. Pneumococcal urinary antigen
(1) Sensitivity for pneumococcal pneumonia, 50–80%
(2) Specificity, 90% (false-positives may occur second-
ary to colonization)
g. Legionella urinary antigen 70–90% sensitive, 99% specific
Treatment
A. Prevention: Indications for polyvalent pneumococcal vaccine
1. Persons ≥65 years old and adults of any age with: 
2. Diabetes
3. Chronic heart, lung, renal, or liver disease 
4. Alcoholism 
5. Immunosuppression (including asplenia)
6. Native Americans, Alaskans, or residents of long-term care
facilities 
B. One time revaccination is recommended after 5 years in
immunocompromised adults and those who received their
first dose before age 65.
C. Determine need for hospitalization
1. Prospective validated clinical tools can help determine the
need for admission (see Figure 9–4).
2. Indications for admission 
a. Hypoxia 
b. Shock 
c. Pleural effusion 
d. Multilobar infiltrates on CXR 
e. Failure of prior outpatient therapy 
f. Confusion 
g. Unable to tolerate oral intake 
h. Unreliable social situation 
i. Certain underlying diseases (sickle cell disease,
immunocompromise, severe chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease [COPD] or heart failure [HF])
3. The CURB-65 score is a validated model that predicts
mortality. 
a. Criteria are confusion (to person, place or time), ure-
mia (BUN > 20 mg/dL), RR ≥30 breaths per minute,
systolic BP < 90 mm Hg or diastolic BP ≤60 mm Hg,
age ≥65.
b. A score of > 1 is associated with an increased mortality
and the need for hospital admission. 
D. Evaluation
1. Chest film is recommended in the evaluation of all
patients with CAP.
2. Evaluate oxygenation in all patients (ABG or SaO2)
3. An ABG is required in patients with respiratory distress,
particularly those with preexistent COPD.
A normal SaO2 on pulse oximetry does not exclude
hypercarbia and respiratory failure. A blood gas to
check PaCO2 is required for patients with respira-
tory distress.
4. Determining the causative agent
a. Most patients are treated empirically, to cover the most
common organisms responsible for CAP
b. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) has
published guidelines for more extensive testing on
select inpatients (Table 9–3). 
c. Patients with severe pneumonia should have blood and
sputum cultures, sputum Gram stain, and urinary tests
for pneumococcal and Legionella antigen.
d. CAP is the most common pneumonia among outpa-
tients with an infiltrate and fever. 
e. Nonetheless, clinicians should always consider other
less common pneumonias including aspiration, TB,
and pneumocystis. 
(1) A history of neurologic impairment or drug abuse
should suggest aspiration.  
(2) Chronic symptoms, upper lobe disease, or cavitary
lesions should suggest TB. 
152 /  CHAPTER 9
(3) HIV risk factors or bilateral fluffy infiltrates should
suggest PCP (see Figure 9–4).
5. Patients with pleural effusions require diagnostic thoracentesis
to rule out empyema or complicated parapneumonic effusions,
which require chest tube drainage in addition to antibiotics. 
6. HIV testing is recommended for all adults aged 15–54 years
who have CAP.
E. Antibiotics 
1. Treatment must cover pyogenic and atypical (Mycoplasma
and Chlamydia) organisms.
2. Penicillin-resistant S pneumoniae (PRSP)
a. Increasing resistance in United States
b. Marked geographic variability in frequency of resist-
ance but up to 65% in some areas
c. PRSP often resistant to cephalosporins and macrolides
but not quinolones with extended activity against S
pneumoniae.
3. Empiric therapy (recommendations from the IDSA 2007)
a. Outpatients
(1) Previously healthy outpatients without recent use of
antibiotics (3 months) are usually treated with an
advanced macrolide (azithromycin or clarithromycin).
In areas with a high rate of macrolide resistance, a res-
piratory quinolone (moxifloxacin, levofloxacin, or
gemifloxacin) should be substituted.
(2) Outpatients recently treated with antibiotics or
with comorbidities (heart, lung, liver, or kidney
disease; diabetes mellitus; alcoholism; cancer;
asplenia; immunosuppression) are treated with a
respiratory fluoroquinolone or an advanced
macrolide plus a β-lactam (high-dose amoxicillin
or amoxicillin-clavulanate).
b. Inpatients 
(1) Inpatients should be treated with respiratory fluo-
roquinolone or advanced macrolide with β-lactam.
(2) Drotrecogin alpha (activated protein C) should be
considered in patients with pneumonia and septic
shock that persists despite fluid resuscitation and
in those with pneumonia, sepsis, and leucopenia.
(3) Hypotensive patients with severe CAP should be
screened for adrenal insufficiency and treated if
their cortisol response to stimulation is inadequate.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Ms. L does not have risk factors for aspiration pneumo-
nia. Influenza is highly unlikely in August. The differential
diagnosis is narrowed to CAP and acute bronchitis.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, CAP? Have you ruled out
the active alternatives? Do other tests need to
be done to exclude the alternative diagnosis?
Table 9–3. IDSA guidelines for more extensive testing in persons with CAP.
Indication
Blood culture
Sputum culture
Legionella UAT
Pneumococcal UAT
Other
Intensive care unit admission
X
X
X
X
Xa
Failure of outpatient antibiotic therapy
X
X
X
Cavitary infiltrates
X
X
Xb
Leukopenia
X
X
Active alcohol abuse
X
X
X
X
Chronic severe liver disease
X
X
Severe obstructive/structural lung disease
X
Asplenia (anatomic or functional)
X
X
Recent travel (within past 2 weeks)
X
Xc
Positive Legionella UAT result
Xd
NA
Positive pneumococcal UAT result
X
X
NA
Pleural effusion
X
X
X
X
Xe
NOTE. NA, not applicable; UAT, urinary antigen test.
aEndotracheal aspirate if intubated, possibly bronchoscopy or nonbronchoscopic bronchoalveolar lavage.
bFungal and tuberculosis cultures.
cSee table 8 for details.
dSpecial media for Legionella.
eThoracentesis and pleural fluid cultures.
CAP, community-acquired pneumonia; IDSA, Infectious Diseases Society of America; NA, not applicable; UAT, urinary antigen test.
(Reproduced, with permission, from Mandell LA, Wunderink RG, Anzueto A et al. Infectious Diseases Society of America/American Thoracic
Society consensus guidelines on the management of community-acquired pneumonia in adults. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44 Suppl 2:S27–72.)
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  153
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Bronchitis
Textbook Presentation
Acute bronchitis presents in the healthy adult primarily as a cough
of 1–3 weeks duration. Myalgias and low-grade fevers may be
seen. This is distinct from an acute exacerbation of COPD (see
Chapter 28, Wheezing and Stridor).
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Viruses
a. Influenza
b. Parainfluenza
c. Respiratory syncytial virus
d. Adenovirus
e. Rhinovirus
f. Coronavirus
2. Bacterial
a. < 10% of cases are caused by bacteria
b. Organisms include Bordetella pertussis, Mycoplasma, and
Chlamydia
3. Noninfectious
a. Asthma
b. Pollution
c. Tobacco
d. Cannabis
B. Symptoms
1. Initial phase: Cough and systemic symptoms secondary to
infection are seen.
2. Fever may be low grade. Consider pneumonia in patients
whose fever is high-grade or persistent.
3. Protracted phase
a. In 26% of patients, cough persists secondary to bronchial
hyperresponsiveness and lasts 2–4 weeks or more.
b. 40–65% of patients without prior pulmonary disease
show evidence of reactive airway disease during acute
bronchitis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Sputum may be clear or discolored. Discoloration arises from
tracheobronchial epithelium cells and WBCs and is not diag-
nostic of bacterial infection.
Purulent sputum is not an indication for antibiotic
therapy in patients with acute bronchitis.
B. Chest film is not routine but is indicated when pneumonia is
being considered; (See Figure 9–3) indications include 
1. Abnormal vital signs including high fever (temperature >
38°C), tachypnea (RR > 24 breaths per minute), tachy-
cardia (HR > 100 bpm) 
2. Dyspnea 
3. Focal findings on lung exam
4. Elderly patients
5. Presence of COPD, HF, cancer, or immunocompromised
state
C. Testing for influenza can be considered in febrile patients who
present during influenza season within 48 hours of symptoms
onset in whom antiviral therapy is being considered (see below).
Treatment
A. Antibiotics
1. Antibiotics do not provide major clinical benefit and are
not recommended in the treatment of acute bronchitis.
2. Influenza treatment shortens the course of illness in
patients with influenza treated within 48 hours of symp-
toms (see below) and can be considered in patients with
bronchitis due to this pathogen.
B. Bronchodilators significantly reduce cough in patients with
bronchial hyperreactivity, wheezing, or airflow obstruction at
baseline.
C. Antitussives are useful symptomatic measures.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
At this point, obtaining a chest radiograph is critical.
WBCs and sputum and blood cultures can be obtained
but are too insensitive to rule out pneumonia.
A chest film reveals a left lower-lobe infiltrate, con-
firming the diagnosis of pneumonia.
25–50% of patients with pneumonia do not have
crackles on auscultation. Chest film is required
when pneumonia is suspected.
1
WBC is 10,200 cells/mcL with 67% neutrophils and 5%
bands. Her SaO2 is 96% on room air. An HIV test should
be ordered, antibiotics must be chosen, and a decision
must be made to admit or discharge Ms. L.
1
Ms. L’s CURB-65 score is 0 and she has no indications
for admission (see Figure 9–4). She has no risk factors
for aspiration, and her chest radiograph does not sug-
gest TB or PCP. Her HIV test is negative. She is treated
for CAP with azithromycin and instructed to call immedi-
ately if her fever increases or increasing shortness of
breath or chest pain develop.
One week later, she reports feeling much better. A follow-up
chest film 6 weeks later shows resolution of the pneumonia.
A follow-up chest radiograph is indicated in
patients with pneumonia to exclude an underlying
obstructing mass.
154 /  CHAPTER 9
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mr. P is a 32-year-old man with cough and progressive
shortness of breath over the last 4 weeks. He complains
of a persistent cough productive of purulent sputum and
low-grade fever. His past medical history is unremarkable.
Social history: Mr. P reports that he is homeless. He
admits to drinking 1 pint of gin per day. He reports no his-
tory of recreational or injection drug use. He reports
that he has rarely used paid sex workers. He has no his-
tory of sex with men. He denies using condoms.
On physical exam he appears disheveled and smells of
alcohol and urine. Vital signs are pulse, 95 bpm; temper-
ature, 37.0°C; RR, 20 breaths per minute; BP, 140/90 mm
Hg. There is temporal wasting. Lung exam reveals diffuse
fine crackles in the lower lung fields bilaterally. Cardiac
exam is normal. His chest radiograph demonstrates
bilateral lower lobe infiltrates. No cardiomegaly is seen.
A CBC is normal. SaO2 is 88%. His BUN is 18 mg/dL.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The clinical findings of cough, shortness of breath, crackles on
pulmonary exam, and infiltrates on chest film all suggest pneu-
monia. One pivotal feature of this case is the long duration of
symptoms. CAP is possible but less likely with such protracted
symptoms. More chronic processes such as aspiration pneumonia
or TB should be considered. Another pivotal feature of Mr. P’s
case is his alcoholism. Alcoholism, substance abuse, and neuro-
logic disorders are leading risk factors for aspiration, and his alco-
holism makes aspiration pneumonia the leading diagnosis. The
duration of his complaints and temporal wasting also raise the
possibility of more chronic pneumonias caused by TB, fungi, or
PCP. TB is more common in alcoholic patients and malnourished
patients. Given the public health risks, TB is a must not miss pos-
sibility. A third pivotal feature in this patient is his high-risk sex-
ual behavior increasing his risk for HIV infection and PCP. PCP
primarily affects HIV-infected patients. It is important to consider
PCP even in patients without a history of known HIV infection
because PCP can be the first sign of HIV infection. The sexual his-
tory makes PCP (or another HIV-related pneumonia) an active
alternative diagnosis. Finally, uncomplicated influenza does not
persist for 4 weeks, although a postinfluenza pneumonia could be
considered in the proper season. Table 9–4 lists the differential
diagnosis.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Aspiration Pneumonia
Textbook Presentation
Aspiration pneumonia typically develops in patients with
impaired mentation (ie, the demented elderly patient or alco-
holic). Classic symptoms include fever, cough, chest pain, and
putrid sputum. The syndrome most commonly evolves over days
to weeks rather than acutely.
Disease Highlights
A. Patients can aspirate oropharyngeal secretions or gastric con-
tents. 
1. Gastric acid aspiration may result in chemical damage
(aspiration pneumonitis) and may be accompanied by sub-
sequent infection (aspiration pneumonia). 
2. Factors that contribute to the development of aspiration
pneumonia include aspiration, colonization, impaired
immunity, and decreased pulmonary clearance.
B. Risk factors for aspiration
1. Neurologic disease (dementia, cerebrovascular accident,
seizures)
Table 9–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. P.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Aspiration
Impaired mentation
Chest radiograph 
pneumonia
(dementia, prior
stroke, substance abuse)
Active Alternatives-Most Common
CAP
Cough
Chest radiograph
Shortness of breath
Blood culture 
High fever 
Sputum culture 
Crackles or dullness
and Gram stain 
on lung exam
(occasionally)
PCP
Injection drug use,
HIV
men who have sex
CD4 count
with men, engaging
Chest radiograph
in sex with paid
demonstrating diffuse
sex workers
bilateral infiltrates
Active Alternatives-Must Not Miss
TB
Long duration
Chest radiograph
of symptoms
shows upper lobe,
Risk factors for TB
cavitary or 
(alcoholism, HIV
reticulonodular
infection, foreign- 
disease 
born persons, cancer,
Sputum for acid- 
diabetes, homeless
fast stain and culture
persons, end-stage
renal disease, use of
corticosteroids,
incarceration) 
CAP, community-acquired pneumonia; PCP, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia;TB,
tuberculosis.
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  155
2. Sedation (illicit drug or alcohol overdose, general anesthesia)
3. Impaired oral pharyngeal clearance (status post head and
neck surgery)
4. Gastroesophageal reflux disease, vomiting
5. Endoscopy, tracheostomy, bronchoscopy, nasogastric feeding
C. Aspiration pneumonitis
1. Aspirated contents with lower pHs and larger volumes
leads to more damage
2. Clinical syndrome
a. Usually follows large volume aspiration (ie, during
anesthesia)
b. Cyanosis and shortness of breath develop within 2 hours
c. Fever is usually low grade
d. Outcome varies
(1) Rapid recovery within 24–36 hours (62%), bacte-
rial superinfection (26%), acute respiratory distress
syndrome (12%) 
(2) Bacterial superinfection may lead to pneumonia,
lung abscess, or empyema.
D. Aspiration pneumonia refers to infection due to aspirated organisms.
1. Accounts for 5–15% of pneumonias
2. Poor dentition increases the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
3. Aspiration is usually not witnessed.
4. Clinical features include cough, fever, sputum production, and
shortness of breath, which may progress over days to weeks.
5. Organisms
a. Community-acquired aspiration pneumonia may be
caused by anaerobes, S pneumoniae, S aureus, and H
influenzae.
b. Hospital-acquired aspiration pneumonias may be
caused by anaerobes, gram-negative organisms (includ-
ing Pseudomonas), and S aureus.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Often presumptive based on aspiration risk factors, putrid
sputum and typical chest film. Many patients have periodon-
tal disease.
B. Oropharyngeal motility studies can identify certain patients
at risk, particularly those with neurologic impairment.
C. Rigors and acute onset suggest more virulent organisms (ie, S
pneumoniae and S aureus).
D. Chest film
1. The classic location of infection is in the basal segment of
lower lobes, but it can involve upper lobes if aspiration
occurred while the patient was recumbent.
2. Cavitation is more common in aspiration pneumonia than
in CAP.
Treatment
A. Prevention
1. Soft diets and feeding strategies can reduce subsequent
aspiration.
2. Tube feedings decrease the incidence of aspiration pneumonia
in patients with dysphagia (54% vs 13% with oral feeding).
However, despite tube feedings, patients can still aspirate
from gastroesophageal reflux, vomiting, and aspiration of
oropharyngeal contents.
3. Several studies suggest that ACE inhibitors increase the
cough reflex and decrease the rate of pneumonia in per-
sons at-risk (NNT 9-19). 
4. Amantadine promotes dopamine release (which facilitates
cough and decreases dysphagia). It also has been shown to
decrease the rate of pneumonia in elderly patients with
prior stroke (NNT 4.3).
5. Oral hygiene decreases colonization and subsequent
pneumonia.
6. Postprandial semi-recumbent positions decrease the rate of
aspiration pneumonia compared with supine positions.
B. Supportive treatment
1. Suction any material in airway.
2. Intubation if necessary for ventilation, oxygenation, or to
protect airway in patients with altered level of consciousness.
C. Aspiration pneumonitis
1. Antibiotics are recommended if the infiltrates do not
resolve within 48 hours or if the patient likely has gastric
colonization (resulting from a H2-blocker, proton pump
inhibitor, or from bowel obstruction).
2. Corticosteroids are controversial.
D. Aspiration pneumonia: antibiotics are indicated.
1. Community-acquired aspiration
a. First-line options include clindamycin or amoxi-
cillin/clavulanate or amoxicillin with metronidazole.
b. Other options include piperacillin-tazobactam, moxi-
floxacin, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime.
2. Hospital-acquired aspiration: Coverage requires addition of
an antibiotic that is effective against gram-negative organ-
isms and S aureus.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
At this point, it is appropriate to order blood cultures, spu-
tum cultures, and Gram stain. The patient’s chest radi-
ograph does not have any features that suggest TB (see
below), which makes TB less likely. Nonetheless, PPD place-
ment and obtaining sputum for acid-fast bacillus (AFB)
stain and culture would be reasonable. Finally, given the dif-
fuse symmetric infiltrate on chest radiography and his
sexual history, PCP must be considered and testing for HIV
is mandatory. Although the patient’s CURB-65 score is 0,
his hypoxia and lack of a reliable social structure make
admission mandatory. Antibiotics that cover both CAP
and aspiration pneumonia should be started.
Mr. P is admitted to an isolation bed on the general
medical floor. He is empirically treated with clindamycin (for
presumed aspiration pneumonia), azithromycin, and ceftri-
axone. The PPD test is done and is negative. Blood cultures
are negative and sputum cultures reveal normal flora.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, aspiration pneumo-
nia? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives TB and PCP? Do other tests need to be
done to exclude the alternative diagnosis?
156 /  CHAPTER 9
Alternative Diagnosis: PCP 
Textbook Presentation
Patients with PCP may have diagnosed or undiagnosed advanced
HIV disease. Patients commonly complain of progressive short-
ness of breath and dry cough of 1 to 3 week duration.
PCP is often the presenting manifestation of AIDS.
Suspect PCP in patients with diffuse bilateral pneu-
monia, particularly of subacute onset.
Disease Highlights
A. PCP presents as diffuse bilateral pneumonia.
B. PCP occurs most commonly in patients with HIV disease and
CD4 counts < 200 cells/mcL.
C. PCP is the most common cause of acute diffuse lung disease
in immunocompromised patients and is the leading cause of
AIDS-related death in HIV-infected patients.
D. PCP may also develop in patients undergoing organ trans-
plantation or chemotherapy and in patients with idiopathic
CD4 lymphocytopenia.
E. The exact classification of the organism is unclear.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. Patients may or may not already carry diagnosis of HIV or
AIDS.
2. Fever is present in 79–100% of cases.
3. Cough is present in 95% of cases. It is usually (but not
always) nonproductive.
4. Progressive dyspnea is present in 95% of cases. 
B. Physical exam
1. Fever is present in 84%.
2. Tachypnea is present in 62%.
3. Chest auscultation is normal in 50% of cases.
C. Chest film
1. Usually shows diffuse symmetric bilateral alveolar or inter-
stitial infiltrates (81–93% of cases)
2. In HIV-infected patients, interstitial infiltrates are present
in 69% of patients and increase the likelihood of PCP
(versus TB or bacterial pneumonia) (LR+ 4.25).
3. Dyspnea or oral thrush combined with a diffuse intersti-
tial pattern on chest radiograph strongly suggest PCP in
HIV-infected persons (sensitivity 58% and 36%, respec-
tively; LR+ ≈7.25). 
4. Isolated upper lobe disease may be seen in patients taking
inhaled pentamidine as PCP prophylaxis.
5. Occasionally shows pneumothorax
6. Normal in 10–25% of cases
PCP should be considered in dyspneic patients with
HIV and CD4 counts < 200 cells/mcL even when
the chest exam and chest radiograph are normal.
D. Specific diagnostic tests
1. Although the chest radiograph and lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) (see below) can suggest PCP or make the diagnosis
less likely, patients require specific tests to confirm or
exclude PCP.
2. Clinical diagnosis (without confirmational staining of
sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL]) is incorrect in
43% of patients.
3. Induced sputums are typically the first test used to diag-
nose PCP. 
a. 55–92% sensitive, 100% specific
b. The addition of immunofluorescent staining increases
sensitivity.
4. BAL is used to diagnose PCP when sputum stains are neg-
ative.
a. Diagnosis is based on staining the fluid obtained dur-
ing BAL.
b. Silver or Giemsa staining and monoclonal antibodies
have been used.
c. Sensitivity is 86–97%.
d. Sensitivity of BAL is lower (62%) after inhaled pen-
tamidine prophylaxis.
5. The most common diagnostic strategy is sputum analysis
with silver stain and immunofluorescence. Positive results
confirm PCP. Negative results should prompt BAL.
6. Other diagnostic tools being investigated include the
study of sputum, blood and nasal pharyngeal specimens
with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and the measure-
ment of serum s-adenosylmethionine (which falls in
patients infected with PCP).
E. Nonspecific diagnostic tests
1. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is a nonspecific test; it is
elevated in 90% of cases, but specificity is low. Although
LDH can be helpful, some patients with PCP have normal
LDH levels. 
2. High-resolution chest CT scan
a. Patchy or nodular ground-glass appearance; ground
glass most marked in perihilar regions. Cystic lesions
may be seen.
b. 100% sensitive, 83–89% specific
c. LR+, 5.9; LR−, 0
3. Pulmonary function tests
a. Carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of the lungs
(DLCO) is usually low in PCP and highly sensitive.
b. Likelihood of PCP is < 2% if DLCO is > 75% pre-
dicted.
Treatment
A. Antimicrobial therapy
1. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) is initial
treatment of choice.
2. Antibiotic therapy may markedly worsen preexistent
hypoxia. Many patients require concomitant glucocorti-
coids to prevent acute respiratory distress syndrome (see
below).
3. IV pentamidine and TMP-SMX have similar efficacy.
4. Occasional resistance to TMP-SMX has been reported.
5. Both TMP and pentamidine may cause hyperkalemia.
6. Patients allergic to TMP-SMX may be desensitized.
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  157
7. Other options reserved for patients with mild to moderate
PCP infections include clindamycin plus primaquine,
dapsone plus TMP or atovaquone.
B. Glucocorticoids
1. Reduce mortality and respiratory failure in patients with
severe PCP treated with TMP-SMX.
2. Initiate at time of PCP therapy if room air PaO2 < 70 mm
Hg or the A-a gradient ≥35 mm Hg.
3. Prednisone 40 mg twice daily for 5 days, then 40 mg daily
for 5 days, then 20 mg daily for 11 days.
Concomitant glucocorticoid therapy is lifesaving in
patients with PCP whose PaO2 < 70 mm Hg.
C. Prophylaxis
1. Indications
a. Prior PCP
b. CD4 counts < 200 cells/mcL
c. HIV-infected patients with unexplained persistent
fevers or oral candidiasis for more than 2 weeks
2. TMP-SMX is superior to pentamidine and the drug of
choice. In addition, it is effective prophylaxis against tox-
oplasmosis and some bacterial infections.
3. Significant adverse reactions are common with TMP-
SMX. Rash, fever, neutropenia, and hypotension may
necessitate discontinuation of TMP-SMX. Consultation
with an infectious disease specialist is recommended.  
4. Dapsone, pentamidine, and atovaquone are alternative thera-
pies in patients intolerant of TMP-SMX. Some authorities
recommend screening patients for glucose 6-phosphate dehy-
drogenase (G6PD) deficiency prior to instituting dapsone. 
5. HAART can restore the CD4 count and allow for discon-
tinuation of prophylaxis when CD4 count > 200 cells/mcL
for approximately 3 months.
Alternative Diagnosis:TB
Textbook Presentation
TB pneumonia usually develops due to reactivation of latent
mycobacteria residing in the upper lobes. Symptoms are chronic
and include cough, fever, weight loss, and night sweats. By the
time patients seek medical attention, they have often had these
symptoms for weeks or months. The weight loss and duration of
symptoms often suggest cancer. 
Disease Highlights
A. Obligate aerobe has predilection for lung apices.
B. The organism is slow growing; the generation time is 12–18 hours,
resulting in slow progression.
C. Common and serious
1. Infects 33% of the world’s population
2. 9 million new cases per year and 2 million deaths (worldwide)
D. Epidemiology
1. 7% of US population is PPD positive.
2. Foreign-born persons have the highest rate of TB (9.7 times
higher than US-born persons) and account for 85% of
multidrug resistant TB (MDR-TB) in the United States. 
3. Asians, blacks, and Hispanics have higher rates of TB than
whites (22.9, 8.3 and 7.4 times, respectively). Foreign-
born persons account for a majority of TB cases in Asians
and Hispanics but not blacks. 
4. 67% of cases occur in the nonwhite population.
5. In the nonwhite population, the median age is 39. In
whites, the median age is 62.
6. Reactivation TB accounts for 90% of TB in older patients
and 67% of TB in younger patients.
7. High risk groups
a. HIV
(1) HIV-infected patients are at highest risk for TB
(200 times increased incidence).
(2) TB may be the first manifestation of HIV.
Patients with active or latent TB should be tested
for HIV.
(3) Extrapulmonary TB without pulmonary disease is
more common in patients with AIDS (30%) than
in those without AIDS (15%).
(4) In early HIV infection, TB is fairly typical. How-
ever, in advanced HIV infection, pulmonary TB is
much more often atypical.
b. Alcoholics
c. Other high-risk groups 
(1) Foreign-born persons 
(2) Immunosuppressed patients (including patients
taking corticosteroids) 
(3) Patients with cancer, diabetes mellitus, end-stage
renal disease, transplants, or malnutrition 
(4) PPD-positive patients 
(5) Patients with evidence of prior TB on chest film 
(6) Economically disadvantaged, inner city residents 
(7) Nursing home residents
(8) Hispanics and African Americans 
(9) Drug-dependent persons, homeless persons, prison
inmates
E. Pathophysiology
1. Inhaled organism lands in the middle and lower lobes (due
to increased ventilation).
2. Multiplies over next 3 weeks, spreads to hilar nodes and
often bloodstream.
3. Organism lodges preferentially in areas of high PaO2 (lung
apices, renal cortex, vertebrae).
4. In 90% of patients, the immune system then contains the
organism resulting in typical scarring (Ghon complex).
However, the chest film can be normal.
5. Above sequence usually asymptomatic.
6. In some patients a few viable organisms remain. This is
referred to as latent TB infection (LTBI). Latent TB can
reactivate later (reactivation TB).
7. The PPD is positive 6–8 weeks after the initial infection.
These patients are resistant to subsequent exogenous
infection.
158 /  CHAPTER 9
8. Primary TB
a. In approximately 10% of patients (higher in immuno-
compromised patients and children), the initial infec-
tion is not controlled and causes primary TB.
b. Primary TB accounts for 23–34% of adult cases.
c. Chest radiograph shows patchy lower lobe pneumonia.
(1) Disease is usually unilateral.
(2) Lymphadenopathy is seen in 10–65% of adults.
(3) Often occurs in those unable to mount a sensitized
macrophage response.
(4) PPD may be negative in these patients.
(5) Most cases of primary TB resolve spontaneously
without treatment.
(6) Pneumonia progresses without treatment in 15%
of patients.
9. Reactivation TB
a. 3–5% of patients with LTBI experience reactivation
due to declining immune function
b. Reactivation TB results in 90% of adult non–AIDS-
related TB.
c. 71% of cases occur in foreign-born patients
d. Symptoms are usually insidious and include chronic
cough, weight loss, night sweats, anorexia, and low or
high-grade fevers.
e. Reactivation TB progresses unless patient is treated.
10. Pleural TB takes 2 forms: tuberculous empyema and
tuberculous pleural effusions.
a. Tuberculous empyema
(1) Secondary to direct infection of pleural space (often
from rupture of neighboring tuberculous cavity)
(2) Rare
(3) Pleural fluid characterized by pus and numerous
TB organisms 
b. Tuberculous effusions
(1) Tuberculous effusions result from a delayed hyper-
sensitivity reaction to mycobacterial antigens in
the pleural space. 
(2) Usually due to reactivation in adults (75%) 
(3) Typical features include acute high fever, cough
(94%), and pleuritic chest pain (78%).
(4) Chest radiograph shows unilateral effusion in 95%
of cases. Parenchymal infiltrate is seen in 50% of
cases.
(5) Effusion usually exudative (see below)
(6) PPD is usually positive (69–93%).
11. Extrapulmonary TB may involve the spine, kidney, peri-
cardium, and CNS.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. Only 31–62% of patients with TB have fever.
2. 50% of patients with TB have fever and night sweats or
night sweats alone.
3. Cough was present for more than 1 month in 70% of patients
and may be mild, nonproductive, purulent, or bloody. 
4. Hemoptysis develops in 24% of patients with tubercu-
lous pneumonia compared with 15% of those with CAP
(LR+ 1.6). 
5. 33% of TB cases are diagnosed after admission for an
unrelated complaint.
Patients with TB may complain primarily of night
sweats and weight loss and have a normal lung
exam. Pulmonary TB still needs to be considered in
such patients.
6. Symptoms and risk factors for disease tend to vary
between older patients who often have reactivation TB
and younger patients in whom primary TB is more com-
mon. Compared with older patients, younger patients
have a higher incidence of alcoholism (66% vs 37%). In
addition, younger patients more frequently have fever
(62% vs 31%), night sweats (48% vs 6%), and hemopty-
sis (40% vs 17%).
B. PPD
1. Immune response to 0.1 mL intradermal PPD
2. Turns positive 4–7 weeks after primary infection
3. Test results are determined by measuring the maximal
diameter of induration (not redness).
4. Maximal induration occurs 48–72 hours after injection.
5. Table 9–5 lists the criteria for a positive reaction.
6. Significant reaction suggests prior infection, not necessar-
ily active disease. Patients with positive tests who do not
have active TB are classified as having LTBI.
7. Sensitivity (for active TB) 70–80%
a. Primary TB: PPD is often negative
b. Reactivation TB: PPD is positive in 80% of cases
c. Tuberculous pleurisy: PPD usually positive
d. AIDS patients with TB: PPD is positive in 50% of
cases
A negative PPD does not rule out active TB.
8. Specificity 98–99% but lower in patients who received
bacillus Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vaccination after infancy
9. Interferon γ assays can also suggest LTBI or active TB
infection and are more accurate in previously vaccinated
patients (see below).
10. Annual PPD
a. Useful to determine whether patient has recently con-
verted
b. Recent converters are at higher risk for developing
active TB
c. Conversion defined as increase in induration of ≥10
mm
d. Therapy is indicated for patients who have recently
converted due to high risk of developing active TB.
e. Indications for annual PPD
(1) HIV infection
(2) Health care workers
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  159
(3) Correctional facility workers
(4) Residents in long-term care facilities
(5) Medical conditions that carry an increased risk of
active TB (see above)
(6) Homeless persons
11. Indications for single PPD test
a. Clinical suspicion of active TB
b. Immigrants from high-incidence areas (eg, Africa, Asia,
Latin America)
c. Status post exposure to TB
d. Fibrotic lung lesion
12. Effect of BCG on PPD
a. Vaccine used in some countries to prevent TB
b. BCG has some similarities to PPD and may cause
false-positive PPD reactions
(1) False-positive PPD reactions (≥10 mm) are rare in
adults who received BCG in infancy (≈1%)
(2) However, false-positives are more common in
BCG recipients who were vaccinated ≥2 years of
age (40%). False-positive PPDs remained common
in this group even more than 10 years later (20%). 
13. Booster phenomenon
a. In patients with latent TB, the PPD may revert to neg-
ative many years after infection.
b. In such patients, the initial PPD may be negative but
stimulate immune memory cells such that subsequent
PPD tests may be positive.
c. Subsequent positive tests may be misinterpreted as
recent conversion.
d. Misinterpretation can be avoided by performing the 2-
step skin tests in patients scheduled for annual PPD.
e. Patients with initial negative PPD are retested 1 week
later.
(1) Patient in whom the second PPD test is positive
should be treated as though the first test was positive.
(2) Patients in whom the second PPD test is negative are
truly negative. Any future positive reactions in these
patients should be considered recent conversions.
C. Interferon γ assays
1. Lymphocytes from patients with LTBI or active TB pro-
duce interferon γ when exposed to TB antigens.
2. Blood tests have been recently developed that expose the
patient’s lymphocytes to highly specific TB antigens (not
shared with BCG or most non-tuberculous mycobacteria)
and measure the production of interferon γ by the patient’s
lymphocytes. 
3. These tests are highly specific for active or latent TB
infection. 
a. Prior BCG vaccination and infection with non-
tuberculous mycobacteria do not cause false-positive
reactions that might be seen with PPD. 
b. A recent meta-analysis summarized the sensitivity and
specificity of these tests (and PPD) in patients with
and without prior BCG vaccination and is shown in
Table 9–6.
c. Interferon γ assays are markedly superior to the PPD in
patients with prior BCG vaccination LR+ > 10 versus
1.9, respectively.
4. Positive results confirm either active or latent TB.
5. Positive results do not distinguish active TB from LTBI. In
patients with pneumonia, a positive result could be due to
active TB, or non-tuberculous pneumonia (ie, streptococ-
cal) in a patient with latent TB. 
6. Negative tests decrease the likelihood of TB infection but
are not sufficiently sensitive to rule out active TB when the
clinical suspicion is high (LR– 0.13–0.25).
7. One paper suggested the likelihood of TB was very low in
patients with both a negative PPD and a negative inter-
feron γ assay (LR– 0.02–0.04). If confirmed in other stud-
ies, this could be used to rule out TB. 
8. Interferon assays are more sensitive to TB infections in
immunocompromised patients (ie, HIV infection) and in
patients with active TB.
9. When used for the evaluation of latent TB, patients with
positive results on interferon γ assays are more likely to
develop active TB (if left untreated) than patients with a
positive PPD (14.6% vs 2.3%).
Table 9–5. Criteria for a positive PPD test.
Diameter
of Induration
Population
≥5 mm
Patients with marked impaired immune response
or high pretest probability
HIV infection
Immunosuppressed patients1
Close contacts with persons with infectious TB
Chest radiograph consistent with prior TB2
≥10 mm
Patients with modest impaired immunity
of moderate pretest probability
Medical condition that carry an increased risk
of active TB in patients with latent TB infection3
Foreign born persons arriving from high
prevalence area within 5 years
Injection drug abuse
Homeless persons
Residents and staff of long-term care facilities
(including prisons, shelters, nursing homes)
Health care workers
Children younger than 4 years 
Recent PPD converters (within 2 year period)
≥15 mm
Patients with normal immunity and low pretest 
probability
All others4
1Equivalent to ≥15 mg of prednisone per day ≥1 month, recipient of tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitors, organ transplant recipients.
2Chest radiographic findings suggestive of tuberculosis (TB) include fibrotic
opacities occupying more than 2 cm of upper lobe;pleural thickening or isolated
granuloma suggestive of TB.
3End-stage renal disease, malnutrition (or > 10% loss of ideal body weight), dia-
betes mellitus, lymphoma, leukemia, carcinoma of head, neck or lung, silicosis,
gastrectomy or jejunoileal bypass.
4These patients should not be screened.
Adapted, with permission, from Jasmer RM et al. Latent tuberculosis infec-
tion. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:1860–66. Copyright © 2002. Massachusetts
Medical Society. All rights reserved.
160 /  CHAPTER 9
10. In addition to the higher specificity and sensitivity of
these assays over PPD, they have the added advantage of
not requiring a return visit by the patient to have the test
read, and do not require the expertise of an intradermal
injection or reading. The CDC has recommended that
interferon assays replace PPD for the diagnosis of active
and latent TB infections.
D. Diagnosis of active TB
1. Chest x-ray and clinical features on admission
a. The chest radiograph in TB usually presents in 1 of 3
patterns: apical disease, cavitary disease, or reticular
nodular pattern. Such patterns are consistent with TB.
(1) Sensitivity, 86%; specificity, 83%
(2) LR+, 5.0; LR−, 0.16
TB should be considered in patients with apical,
cavitary, or reticulonodular patterns on chest radi-
ograph. TB is unlikely if none of these features are
present.
b. Cavitation is seen in 19–50% of cases (OR for TB
3.9). The walls are usually thick and irregular. Air-fluid
levels are rare and may indicate anaerobic abscess or
superinfection.
c. Endobronchial spread may result in nodular disease
that clusters in the dependent portion of the lung.
d. Calcification can be seen in active lesions. Demon-
strating stability requires comparison of prior films.
e. 5% of patients with reactivation pulmonary TB have
normal chest radiographs.
f. The chest radiograph in HIV-positive patients is often
atypical (see Chapter 5, HIV/AIDS).
2. AFB stain and culture
a. Culture is the gold standard and is specific.
b. Sensitivity depends on the number of specimens
(Table 9–7). 
c. Patients with positive smears are more infectious that
patients who are culture positive but have negative
smears; 35% of family members of persons with posi-
tive smears are PPD positive compared with 9% of
family members when patients are smear negative.
d. Other mycobacteria may lead to false-positive smears.
e. Specific nucleic amplification tests of sputum for TB
RNA or DNA are specific for TB and can help distin-
guish TB from other mycobacteria. 
(1) Helps distinguish TB from Mycobacterium avium
complex (MAC) or commensual organisms that
are also acid-fast positive. 
(2) Primarily used when AFB stains positive
(3) Particularly useful if suspicion of TB is low
(a) Positive rapid tests help confirm TB, negative
tests make TB less likely
(b) 95% sensitive and specific in this situation
(4) May also be useful when clinical suspicion is high
and smear is negative 
(a) Rapid tests reported to be 53% sensitive, 93%
specific. 
(b) Positive tests suggest TB.
(c) Cultures still required to test drug suscepti-
bility
(5) A diagnostic algorithm for TB is shown in Figure 9–1.
3. BAL
a. Smears: 38% sensitive, 100% specific
b. Culture or smear: 74% sensitive, 75% specific
c. Comparable to data for a single induced sputum
d. Not routine or superior to induced sputums
e. Use when induced sputums are unavailable.
E. Tuberculous pleurisy with effusion
1. Typical pleural fluid findings
a. Exudative effusion 
Table 9–6. Characteristics of various TB tests in patients
with and without prior BCG vaccination.
Test
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR–
Patients without prior BCG vaccination
QuantiFERON-TB
78%
99%
78
0.22
QuantiFERON-TB
70%
99%
70
0.3
Gold In-Tube
T-SPOT.TB
90%
93%
12.9
0.11
PPD
≥15mm: 70%
97%
25.61
0.24
≥10mm: 73%
≥5mm: 80%
Patients with prior BCG Vaccination
QuantiFERON-TB
78%
96%
19.5
0.23
QuantiFERON-TB
70%
96%
17.5
0.31
Gold In-Tube
T-SPOT.TB
90%
93%
12.9
0.11
PPD
≥15 mm: 70%
59%
1.92
0.39
≥10 m: 73%
≥5 mm: 80%
1Calculated using an average sensitivity of PPD of 77%.
2Calculated using an average sensitivity of PPD of 77%.
Table 9–7. Sensitivity of test according to the number of
sputum specimens sent to the laboratory.
Sensitivity
Number of 
Culture
Sputum 
Specimen
Alone
Stain Alone
Either
1
79%
58%
81%
2
96%
82%
97%
3
99%
93%
99%
Reprinted, with permission, from Scott B. Early identification and isolation of
inpatients at high risk for tuberculosis. Arch Intern Med. 1994;154:326–30.
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  161
b. Pleural fluid glucose variable
c. Pleural fluid pH always < 7.4
d. WBC 1000–6000 cells/mcL with neutrophilic pre-
dominance early and lymphocytic predominance later.
Pleural fluid eosinophils > 10% suggests alternative
diagnosis (unless prior thoracentesis).
2. Sensitivity of tests for diagnosis of tuberculous pleurisy
a. Pleural fluid culture, < 30%
b. Pleural biopsy culture, 40–80%
c. Pleural biopsy histology (caseating granulomas),
50–97%
d. Histology and pleural tissue culture > 60–95%
e. Sputum culture, 20–50%
3. Adenosine deaminase: Utility unclear due to different cut
points and different isoenzymes.
4. Pleural fluid interferon γ 89% sensitive, 97% specific
Treatment
A. Isolation
1. Only 1% of all patients tested for TB are proven to have
TB. Consider isolation of hospitalized patients with upper
lobe, cavitary, or reticulonodular disease.
2. Highest risk of contagion among household contacts,
schoolmates, or other close contacts.
3. Patients with cavitary disease, HIV, or watery sputum have
the highest infectivity.
B. Principles of therapy
1. Multi-drug resistance is a significant problem.
2. Precise drug recommendations evolve due to resistance.
3. Susceptibility testing is critical to ensure an appropriate
regimen is used.
4. Premature discontinuation and nonadherence promotes
drug resistance and must be avoided. Direct observed
therapy (DOT) refers to treatment protocols where pub-
lic health officials directly observe patients swallow each
dose of medication (administered 2–3 times/week).
DOT is strongly recommended.
5. Due to the public health risks of MDR-TB, the responsi-
bility for prescribing appropriate therapy and ensuring
adherence rests on the public health program and clinician.
6. Effective regimens require at least 2 drugs to which the
organism is susceptible.
7. Effective therapy takes many months.
8. TB therapy in HIV-infected patients is complex due to
innumerable drug interactions with highly active antiretroviral
Evaluate probability of TB:
1. Typical chest radiograph
(apical or cavitary)
2. Risk factors:
(IVDA or endemic
area)
Blood culture, sputum
AFB smear and culture,
urine culture, PPD,
chest radiograph
Smear
Rapid
diagnostic
test
Culture and
treat
Positive
Positive
Negative
Negative
Consider
bronchoscopy
Smear
Rapid
diagnostic
test
Culture and
wait
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Low clinical suspicion
High clinical suspicion
Figure 9–1. Diagnostic approach:TB.
162 /  CHAPTER 9
therapy (HAART) and the need for differing regimens
depending on the degree of immunosuppression.
9. To determine the duration of therapy, all patients should
have monthly sputums smears analyzed for AFB stain and
culture until 2 consecutive sputum cultures are negative. 
10. All patients should be seen monthly to assess symptoms,
side effects, and adherence to therapy.
11. Infectious disease consultation is advised.
C. Multidrug resistant TB (MDR-TB)
1. Defined as organisms that are resistant to isoniazid and
rifampin
2. Suspect MDR-TB in patients previously treated for TB, in
patients who are HIV positive, in close contacts of patients
with MDR-TB, and in patients who have not responded
to therapy.
3. DOT should be used for patients with MDR-TB.
4. Surgery is occasionally used for patients with localized dis-
ease and persistently positive sputums. Antituberculous
therapy is continued.
5. Expert consultation is mandatory.
D. Treatment in patients at low risk for MDR-TB
1. Initiate therapy with isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide,
and ethambutol.
2. After 2 months, the regimen is simplified to isoniazid and
rifampin, if the organism is fully susceptible, for an addi-
tional 4 months.
3. Patients with cavitary TB who have positive sputum cul-
ture at 2 months should receive isoniazid and rifampin for
an additional 3 months (9 months of therapy altogether).
4. The median duration of fever after the institution of anti-
tuberculous drugs was 10 days but ranged from 1 to 109 days.
For patients with tuberculous effusion, resorption can take
4 months.
E. Pleural fluid drainage does not improve outcome in patients
with tuberculous effusions (nonempyema).
F. Latent TB
1. Definition of positive PPD test depends on the population
(see Table 9–5).
2. The patients with the highest priority for treatment of
latent TB include recent contacts of infectious TB,
patients with HIV infection, and recent immigrants from
high TB prevalence areas.
3. Prior to treatment for LTBI, active infection must be ruled
out with a careful history, physical exam, and chest radi-
ograph.
4. Expert consultation is recommended if exposure to drug-
resistant TB is likely.
5. Isoniazid
a. Drug most commonly used for latent TB
b. Dose is 300 mg/d for 9 months or 900 mg twice a
week with DOT.
c. Side effects
(1) Hepatitis
(a) Reported incidence is 0.1–2.3%
(b) Incidence may be higher in older patients.
(c) Alcohol consumption is the most important
risk factor for isoniazid hepatitis. Patients who
are taking isoniazid should avoid drinking
alcohol.
(d) Monitoring monthly for clinical symptoms of
hepatitis
(e) Obtain baseline and monthly liver function
tests in patients with risk factors for hepatitis
(alcohol consumption, pregnant and postpar-
tum patients, HIV-infected patients, patients
with chronic liver disease or other hepatotoxic
medications).
(f) Repeat liver function tests in symptomatic
patients (right upper quadrant pain, anorexia,
or nausea)
(2) Peripheral neuropathy develops in 2% of patients
taking isoniazid and can be prevented with pyri-
doxine (10–25 mg/d).
6. Other options are available in patients with isoniazid-
resistant TB and in those intolerant of isoniazid.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Fortunately, Mr. P’s HIV result was negative. His PPD and
AFB smears were negative. On day 3 of his hospitaliza-
tion, he became agitated, tachycardic, and complained of
visual hallucinations. He was treated for delirium tremens
with high doses of IV benzodiazepines. By day 5, he was
improving. He was afebrile and his appetite improved. He
was given a prescription for oral antibiotics and dis-
charged to an outpatient alcohol treatment center.
Patients with a history of alcohol abuse must be mon-
itored for withdrawal during any hospitalization.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT 
DISEASES
Influenza
Textbook Presentation
Although there is a wide range of severity of influenza symp-
toms, patients typically complain of a severe, febrile, respira-
tory illness that began abruptly. Complaints include an abrupt
onset (“like being hit by a train”), severe myalgias (even their
eyes hurt when they look around), diffuse pain (they may com-
plain that their hair or skin hurts), respiratory symptoms
(cough, rhinitis, pharyngitis), and fever that is often pro-
nounced and peaks within 12 hours (occasionally as high as
40–41°C). Influenza typically occurs between December and
May. Patients may have rigors (frankly shaking chills) and
headache (Figure 9–2).
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  163
Influenza is an unlikely diagnosis in the late spring,
summer, or early fall.
Disease Highlights
A. Pathogenesis
1. Influenza virus A or B infects respiratory epithelium.
2. Antigenic change in the virus surface glycoprotein (hemag-
glutinin or neuraminidase) renders populations susceptible to
the virus. Antigenic shifts are most common with influenza
virus A and are associated with epidemics. The pandemic of
1918 is believed responsible for 40 million deaths.
3. Adults are infectious from the day prior to the onset of
symptoms until about 5 days later (10 days in children).
4. The incubation period is 1–4 days.
B. Manifestations
1. History
a. Onset is sudden in 75% of cases.
b. Fever present in 51% of cases.
(1) Peaks within 12–24 hours of onset of illness
(2) Typically 38.0-40.0°C, occasionally 41.0°C
(3) Typical duration is 3 days but may last 1–5 days
High fever within 12–24 hours of symptom onset
is typical of influenza but not other viral respiratory
pathogens.
Fever that increases over several days is not typical
of influenza. When accompanied by cough, such a
fever suggests bacterial pneumonia.
c. Prevalence of other symptoms in influenza
(1) Headache, 58–81%
(2) Cough, 48–94%
(3) Sore throat, 46–70%
(4) GI symptoms are not characteristic of influenza.
39.4 (103)
38.8 (102)
38.3 (101)
37.7 (100)
37.2 (99)
36.6 (98)
Oral temperature, °C (°F)
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
8†
< 4
1.0
3.0
4.5
5.0
4.5
3.0
Days after onset of illnesses
Coryza∗
Sore throat
Myalgia
Headache
Cough
Anorexia
Malaise
Virus shed (log10 TCID50)
per mL of blood
Serum antibody (Hl) titer
∗—Coryza is an acute inflammatory condition of the nasal mucous membranes with a profuse
discharge from the nose.
†—Serum antibody titer was 64 at day 21.
Onset of illness
Figure 9–2. The typical clinical course of influenza. (Reproduced with permission from Montalto NJ. An office-
based approach to influenza: Clinical diagnoses and laboratory testing. Am Fam Physician. 2003;67:111–18.
Copyright © 2003. American Academy of Family Physicians.)
164 /  CHAPTER 9
Patients with significant diarrhea or vomiting
should be evaluated for an alternative diagnosis.
d. Symptoms help distinguish influenza from acute bron-
chitis or pneumonia (Table 9–8).
2. Crackles are seen in < 25% of patients.
C. Complications
1. Pneumonia
a. High-risk groups for pneumonia and death include
(1) Elderly. Influenza mortality rates are 200 times
greater in patients over age 65 than in patients
aged 0–49 years. 
(2) HIV-infected patients also suffer a 100 times
increase in mortality.
(3) Other high-risk groups include patients with HF
and COPD; immunocompromised patients; preg-
nant patients; and patients with renal disease, dia-
betes mellitus, or hemoglobinopathies.
b. Two types of pneumonia are seen in influenza patients.
(1) Influenza pneumonia per se
(2) Post-influenza bacterial pneumonia
c. Influenza pneumonia
(1) Often develops within 1 day of onset of influenza 
(2) Most frequent in patients with underlying car-
diopulmonary disease, diabetes, immunodeficiency
states, and pregnancy.
(3) Patients with influenza pneumonia complain of
shortness of breath more often than patients with
uncomplicated influenza (82% vs 17%).
Obtain a chest film in patients with influenza and
shortness of breath to rule out pneumonia.
(4) Associated with tachycardia, tachypnea, cyanosis,
and crackles on pulmonary exam
(5) Hypoxemia and leukocytosis may be seen
(6) Chest film shows bilateral or lobar pulmonary
infiltrates.
(7) 29% mortality
(8) Treatment 
(a) Antiviral therapy 
(b) Empiric antibacterial agents pending culture 
(c) Oxygen 
(d) Intubation, with positive end-expiratory
pressure as necessary 
(e) Antibiotics should cover methicillin-resistant
S aureus in endemic regions.
d. Postinfluenza (secondary) bacterial pneumonia
(1) Suspect when initial improvement is followed by
worsening cough, purulent sputum, and increasing
fever.
(2) Among patients hospitalized for influenza pneu-
monia, 30% have concomitant bacterial pneumo-
nia caused by S aureus or S pneumoniae
(3) Chest film may show either bilateral or lobar infil-
trates.
(4) S pneumoniae is most common (29–48%).
(5) S aureus is next most common (7–40%), highly
destructive, and associated with significant inci-
dence of empyema and death.
(6) Haemophilus and Moraxella may also cause sec-
ondary pneumonia.
2. Exacerbation of asthma or COPD
3. Less common complications include HF, myositis,
myocarditis, pericarditis, meningoencephalitis, Guillain-
Barré syndrome
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History, physical exam, and vaccination status
1. Current prevalence of influenza helps determine risk
a. www.cdc.gov/flu/weekly/fluactivity.htm
b. 888/232-3228
2. Summary of findings and likelihood ratios is presented in
Table 9–9.
a. The negative likelihood ratios are modest, suggesting it
is difficult to rule out influenza clinically. The absence
of fever and cough helps decrease the likelihood of flu
in patients of all ages, but less so in patients ≥60.
b. Fever and cough, particularly in older patients,
increases the likelihood of influenza.
c. A clinical prediction rule helps rule in influenza (fever
≥37.8°C with at least 2 of the following: headache,
myalgia, cough, or sore throat and symptom onset
within 48 hours. In addition, the rule requires at least
2 cases of confirmed influenza in the community). 
B. Laboratory results
1. Confirmation is usually not required.
2. During influenza outbreaks, empiric therapy without lab-
oratory confirmation is appropriate in patients with typi-
cal symptoms, clear lung fields, and no history of vaccina-
tion who present within 48 hours of symptom onset. 
Table 9–8. Comparison of features in influenza,
community-acquired pneumonia, and acute bronchitis.
Localized
Shortness
High
Lung
of 
Infection
Fever1
Findings2
Breath3
Season
Community
Common
Common
Variable
Anytime
acquired
pneumonia
Influenza
Common
Uncommon
Uncommon4
December-
May
Acute
Uncommon
Uncommon
Uncommon
Anytime
bronchitis
1Indication for chest film (unless flu season and patient has normal lung exam).
2Findings include crackles, dullness, bronchophony or egophony.
All such findings indication for chest film.
3Indication for chest film.
4Unless influenza pneumonia.
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  165
3. Rapid testing is most appropriate in noninfluenza periods.
a. Various methods are available including fluorescent anti-
body, reverse transcriptase PCR, enzyme immunoassays,
and others. 
b. Sensitivity and specificity vary from test to test, source
of sample, duration of illness, and patient age.  
(1) In general, the tests are highly specific (90–95%)
and help rule in influenza when positive (LR+
28.2). 
(2) However, the tests are not terribly sensitive
(70–75%) and cannot rule out influenza (LR– 0.7). 
c. Nasopharyngeal swabs are more effective than throat
swab specimens.
4. Institutionalized patients are at higher risk for respiratory
syncytial virus, which can mimic influenza. Testing may be
useful in such patients.
Treatment
A. Prevention
1. Options include vaccination or chemoprophylaxis with
neuraminidase inhibitors.
2. Trivalent inactivated influenza vaccine (TIV)
a. Prophylactic strategy of choice
b. IM vaccine uses inactivated (killed) viruses that are
currently prevalent.
c. Updated and administered annually.
d. 50% fewer cases of influenza, associated pneumonia,
and hospitalizations
e. 68% decrease in all cause mortality
f. Contraindications
(1) Egg allergy
(2) Significant febrile illness at time of vaccination
(Patients may be vaccinated during mild non-
febrile upper respiratory tract infections.)
(3) History of Guillain-Barré syndrome following prior
vaccination
g. Adverse effects
(1) Soreness at injection site occurs in 10–64% of
patients
(2) No increase in systemic symptoms (compared with
placebo)
(3) Guillain-Barré may increase by 1 case per million
recipients.
(4) Upper respiratory tract infection symptoms are
not more common than placebo.
(5) TIV cannot cause influenza.
h. Indications
(1) Patients older than 50 years
(2) Patients with diabetes; cardiopulmonary disease
(including asthma, smokers); renal, hepatic or
hematologic disease (ie, sickle cell disease)
(3) Any individual wishing to reduce their chance of
influenza
(4) Residents of long-term care facilities
(5) Immunosuppression (including corticosteroid
use, HIV disease)
(6) Women who will be pregnant during flu season
(7) Health care personnel
(8) Employees or household members having con-
tact with high-risk groups (including vaccinating
contacts of children < 6 months)
(9) Neurologic disease that impairs handling of res-
piratory secretions
(10) Travelers to the Southern Hemisphere during
April to December can consider vaccination or
revaccination (if already vaccinated). Persons
traveling with organized groups from many parts
of the world can also consider vaccination.
3. Live-attenuated intranasal vaccine (LAIV)
a. Uses live-attenuated strains administered intranasally
that replicate poorly in the warmer lower respiratory
tract.
b. Increases upper respiratory symptoms due to intranasal
viral replication. Compared with placebo, LAIV
increases nasal congestion (45% vs 27%) and sore throat
(28% vs 17%).
c. Persons vaccinated with LAIV can transmit the atten-
uated infection to other persons.
d. Should not be given to contacts of severely immuno-
suppressed individuals (ie, hematopoietic stem cell
recipients).
e. Approved for healthy nonpregnant persons 5–49 years
f. Updated and administered annually
g. Should not be given to patients with significant nasal
congestion that may impair delivery
h. Still under study in older adults
i. Contraindications include egg allergy, pregnancy, a
prior history of Guillain-Barré syndrome, or underly-
ing medical conditions that serve as an indication for
TIV. 
4. Chemoprophylaxis
a. Significantly more costly than vaccination
Table 9–9. Likelihood ratios for signs and symptoms in
influenza.
Patients: all ages
Patients ≥60 y
Finding
LR+
LR–
LR+
LR–
Fever
1.8
0.40
3.8
0.72
Cough
1.1
0.42
2.0
0.57
Chills
1.1
0.68
2.6
0.66
Fever and cough
1.9
0.54
5.0
0.75
Fever and cough
2
0.54
5.4
0.77
and acute onset
Decision rule1
6.5
0.3
Vaccine history
0.63
1.1
1See text.
166 /  CHAPTER 9
b. Oseltamivir and zanamivir are neuraminidase
inhibitors active against influenza viruses A and B and
are usually highly effective as chemoprophylaxis.
c. Amantadine and rimantadine are not effective against
influenza B (and often not to influenza A) and should
not be used for chemoprophylaxis or treatment. 
d. Indications for chemoprophylaxis: 
(1) Persons at high risk (or those who come in contact
with such persons) who were vaccinated after expo-
sure to influenza (treat for 2 weeks after vaccination). 
(2) Persons with immune deficiencies who are
unlikely to mount a response to vaccination (ie,
those with advanced HIV disease) could also
receive prophylaxis.
(3) Persons with contraindications to vaccination.
(4) Persons living in institutions during outbreaks (ie,
nursing homes) regardless of vaccination status. 
B. Treatment of influenza
1. Zanamivir and oseltamivir 
a. When given within 48 hours of symptom onset, they
reduce the symptom severity and the duration of symp-
toms approximately 1–2 days. Oseltamivir has also been
demonstrated to reduce the incidence of pneumonia. 
b. Minimal to no benefit is seen when started > 2 days
after symptom onset.
c. Safety during pregnancy is unknown.
d. Studies suggest that empiric therapy is cost effective for
several groups.
e. Rapid influenza testing is recommended if prevalence
of influenza is low.
2. Oseltamivir
a. Route of administration is oral. Taking the drug with
food decreases nausea and vomiting, which occurs in
10% of patients.
b. Transient neuropsychiatric events have been recorded.
c. Reduce the dose by 50% if creatinine clearance < 30
mL/min.
d. Drug resistance
(1) A strain of influenza A (H1N1) was discovered to be
resistant to oseltamivir in the 2008–2009 season. 
(2) The CDC has recommended combining oseltamivir
with rimantadine or using zanamivir alone for this
strain or if the influenza strain is unknown. 
(3) Oseltamivir alone is recommended for other strains
of influenza (influenza B or influneza A, H3N2).
3. Zanamivir
a. Route of administration is inhalation; can cause bron-
chospasm.
b. Not recommended in patients with asthma or COPD.
4. Indications for treatment
a. All people at high risk for complications in whom
influenza develops, regardless of their vaccination status
b. Persons with severe influenza
c. Consider for persons with influenza who wish to
shorten the duration of illness.
REFERENCES
Call SA, Vollenweider MA, Hornung CA, Simel DL, McKinney WP. Does this
patient have influenza? JAMA. 2005;293(8):987–97.
Dosanjh DP, Hinks TS, Innes JA et al. Improved diagnostic evaluation of suspected
tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148(5):325–36.
Kikawada M, Iwamoto T, Takasaki M. Aspiration and infection in the elderly: epi-
demiology, diagnosis and management. Drugs Aging. 2005;22(2):115–30.
Kunimoto D, Long R. Tuberculosis: still overlooked as a cause of community-
acquired pneumonia—how not to miss it. Respir Care Clin N Am. 2005;11(1):
25–34.
Metlay JP, Fine MJ. Testing strategies in the initial management of patients with
community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2003;138(2):109–18.
Metlay JP, Kapoor WN, Fine MJ. Does this patient have community-acquired
pneumonia? Diagnosing pneumonia by history and physical examination.
JAMA. 1997;278(17):1440–5.
Metlay JP, Schulz R, Li YH et al. Influence of age on symptoms at presentation in
patients with community-acquired pneumonia. Arch Intern Med.
1997;157(13):1453–9.
Montalto NJ. An office-based approach to influenza: clinical diagnosis and labora-
tory testing. Am Fam Physician. 2003;67(1):111–8.
O’Brien WT Sr, Rohweder DA, Lattin GE Jr et al. Clinical indicators of radi-
ographic findings in patients with suspected community-acquired pneumo-
nia: who needs a chest x-ray? J Am Coll Radiol. 2006;3(9):703–6.
Pai M, Zwerling A, Menzies D. Systematic review: T-cell-based assays for the diag-
nosis of latent tuberculosis infection: an update. Ann Intern Med.
2008;149(3):177–84.
Rapid Diagnostic Testing for Influenza: Information for Health Care Professionals.
(Accessed at http://www.cdc.gov/flu/professionals/diagnosis/rapidclin.htm.)
Role of Laboratory Diagnosis of Influenza. (Accessed at http://www.cdc.gov/flu/
professionals/diagnosis/labrole.htm.)
Selwyn PA, Pumerantz AS, Durante A et al. Clinical predictors of Pneumocystis
carinii pneumonia, bacterial pneumonia and tuberculosis in HIV-infected
patients. AIDS. 1998;12(8):885–93.
Stein J, Louie J, Flanders S et al. Performance characteristics of clinical diagnosis,
a clinical decision rule, and a rapid influenza test in the detection of
influenza infection in a community sample of adults. Ann Emerg Med.
2005;46(5):412–9.
Tietjen PA. Clinical presentation and diagnosis of Pneumocystis carinii (P. jiroveci)
infection in HIV-infected patients. In: UpToDate; 2008.
COUGH AND CONGESTION /  167
Acute cough < 3 weeks duration
(with or without sputum)
Pneumonia unlikely
Treat symptomatically
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HF, heart failure.
1Egophony, crackles, dullness to percussion
2Febrile patients very likely to have influenza may not require
 a chest radiograph. (ie, those fulfilling all of the following:
 influenza season, unvaccinated patient, maximum fever
 within the first 24 hours, no dyspnea or focal findings).
 Clinical judgment is required.
Special
circumstances
Focal lung findings1
T > 38°C2 HR > 100 bpm,
RR > 24 breaths per minute
Dyspnea
Elderly patient
Immunocompromised
COPD
HF
HIV + patient
See
Chapter 5,
HIV/AIDS
Yes
Obtain
chest radiograph
See Figure 9–4
Abnormal
Yes
No
Figure 9–3. Diagnostic approach: acute cough and fever.
168 /  CHAPTER 9
Infiltrate on
chest radiograph
Aspiration
Tuberculosis
Significant
fever and
crackles?
Yes
Yes
No
No
Treat symptoms
1. Empiric antibiotics
2. Consider repeat chest film
 
after rehydration
3. Consider influenza
 
therapy in flu season
Any of the following?
CURB-65 score > 13
Hypoxia
Shock
Pleural effusion
Confusion
Unable to tolerate oral intake
Unreliable social situation
Staphylococcus aureus
  infection
Admission1
1. Consider admission
2. Consider non-CAP
 
a. Aspiration
 
b. Tuberculosis
 
c. PCP
 
d. Chronic pneumonia2
1. Clinical Clues
Alcoholism, substance
abuse, altered mental
status, prior stroke
2. Chest radiography
Air/fluid level
OR
1. Clinical Clues
(HIV risk factors)
2. Chest radiography
Bilateral diffuse infiltrate
OR
1. Clinical Clues 
Cough or night sweats > 1 month,
known exposure, involuntary
weight loss, non response to
therapy for CAP, HIV risk factors
2. Chest radiography
Any of the following: upper lobe
disease, cavitary lesion or,
reticulonodular pattern
OR
Pneumocystis
Add anaerobic coverage
Check HIV, CD4 count
Isolate patient; Check IFY;
Send sputums for AFB
1Patients with respiratory failure or septic shock requiring vasopressors should be admitted directly to the ICU. IDSA also recommends
 ICU admission for patients with 3 or more of the following: RR > 30, PaO2/FIO2 < 250 mm Hg, multilobar infiltrates, confusion,
 BUN > 20 mg/dL, leukopenia resulting from infection, thrombocytopenia, hypothermia or hypotension requiring aggressive fluid
 resuscitation.
2Chronic: Consider fungal pneumonia and tuberculosis. Consider bronchoscopy.
3Curb-65 criteria: Confusion (to person, place or time), Uremia (BUN > 20 mg/dL), RR ≥ 30 breaths per minute, Systolic BP < 90 mm Hg
 or diastolic BP ≤ 60 mm Hg, age ≥ 65.
AFB, acid-fast bacilli; CAP, community-acquired pneumonia; IDSA, infectious diseases society of America; PCP, pneumocystis
pneumonia; TX algorithm-expansion of abbrev.
Figure 9–4. Response to the results of the CXR in patients with cough and fever.
?
11
181
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mrs. D is a 50-year-old African American woman who is
worried she has diabetes.
What is the differential diagnosis of dia-
betes? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (DM) is actually a
classification of the different causes of diabetes:
A. Type 1 DM
1. Of the persons with DM in Canada, the United States,
and Europe, 5–10% have type 1.
2. Caused by cellular-mediated autoimmune destruction of
the pancreatic beta cells in genetically susceptible individ-
uals, triggered by an undefined environmental agent
a. Some combination of antibodies against islet cells, insulin,
glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), or tyrosine phos-
phatases IA-2 and IA-2β are found in 85–90% of patients.
b. Strong HLA association
c. Risk is 0.4% in patients without family history, 5–6%
in siblings and children, and 30% in monozygotic twins
d. Patients are also prone to autoimmune thyroid disease,
Addison disease, vitiligo, celiac sprue, autoimmune
hepatitis, myasthenia gravis, and pernicious anemia.
3. Occasionally idiopathic 
a. Usually seen in patients of African or Asian ancestry
b. Strongly inherited but no HLA link or autoimmunity
4. Insulin therapy is always necessary.
5. Patients are at high risk for diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
B. Type 2 DM
C. Other causes of diabetes
1. Genetic defects of beta cell function or insulin action
2. Exocrine pancreatic diseases (pancreatitis, trauma, infec-
tion, pancreatectomy, pancreatic carcinoma)
3. Endocrinopathies (acromegaly, Cushing syndrome,
glucagonoma, pheochromocytoma)
4. Medications (especially corticosteroids)
5. Infections
D. Gestational diabetes
Type 1 DM generally occurs in children, although approximately
7.5–10% of adults assumed to have type 2 DM actually have type
1, as defined by the presence of circulating antibodies. Type 2 DM
is becoming more prevalent in teenagers and young adults, pre-
sumably related to the increased prevalence of obesity.
In most patients, the distinction between type 1 and type 2
DM is clear. Thus, the primary tasks of the clinician are to deter-
mine who should be tested for diabetes, who has diabetes, which
complications to monitor, and how to treat the patient.
1
Mrs. D has worried about having diabetes since her
father died of complications from the disease. Over the
last couple of weeks, she has been urinating more than
usual. She is aware that excess urination can be a symp-
tom of diabetes, so she scheduled an appointment.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. D’s pretest probability of diabetes is high because of 2 pivotal
points in her history, the urinary frequency and the positive family
history. The rest of the differential diagnosis consists of other enti-
ties that can cause urinary frequency, such as urinary tract infection,
excess fluid intake, and bladder dysfunction. Other diseases that
cause true polyuria, defined as urinary output of > 3 L/day, should
also be considered. Table 11–1 lists the differential diagnosis. 
1
Mrs. D has no dysuria or hematuria. She takes no med-
ications, drinks 1 cup of coffee per day, and uses alcohol
rarely. She has been trying to lose weight and has been
drinking more water in an attempt to reduce her appetite.
On physical exam, she looks a bit tired. Vital signs are
as follows: BP, 138/82 mm Hg; pulse, 96 bpm; RR,
16 breaths per minute. The remainder of the physical
exam is normal. A random plasma glucose is 152 mg/dL.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
I have a patient who is concerned that she has
diabetes. How do I confirm the diagnosis and treat
patients with diabetes?
Leading Hypothesis:Type 2 DM
Textbook Presentation
Patients with type 2 DM can have the classic symptoms of
polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss. The presentation can also be
more subtle, with patients complaining that they feel tired or “just
not right.” Many patients are asymptomatic; the diagnosis is made
after plasma glucose testing. The complications of diabetes may
already be present by the time patients seek medical attention. 
Disease Highlights
A. Caused by a combination of impaired insulin secretion and
insulin resistance with no evidence of autoimmunity
B. Accounts for 90–95% of cases of DM, with prevalence in the
United States of about 13–14%; up to 50% of patients are
unaware that they have DM. 
C. The lifetime risk of diabetes developing in individuals born in
2000 is estimated to be 32.8% for males and 38.5% for
females; rates are as high as 50% for African American and
Hispanic women.
D. Strong genetic component
1. In the United States, type 2 DM is 2–6 times more preva-
lent among African Americans, Native Americans, Pima
Indians, and Latinos than among whites.
2. 39% of patients have at least 1 parent with diabetes
3. 60–90% concordance in monozygotic twins
4. The lifetime risk of a first-degree relative of a patient with
type 2 DM is 5–10 times higher than that of age- and
weight-matched individuals without a family history.
E. The most important risk factor is obesity, which induces
insulin resistance. 
1. The RR of diabetes developing in a woman who has a
body mass index (BMI) > 35 kg/m2 is 93, compared with
a woman who has a BMI < 22 kg/m2.
2. The RR of diabetes developing in a man who has a BMI >
35 kg/m2 is 42, compared with a man who has a BMI <
23 kg/m2.
F. DKA develops less often in patients with type 2 DM than
those with type 1; however, DKA can occur in persons with
type 2 DM.
Do not assume all patients with DKA have type 1
DM; DKA can develop in persons with type 2 DM.
G. Risk factors for type 2 DM include
1. Age ≥45
2. BMI ≥25 kg/m2
3. A first-degree relative with diabetes
4. Physical inactivity
5. Being a member of a high-risk ethnic group (African
American, Latino, Native American, Asian American,
Pacific Islander)
6. Having delivered a baby weighing > 9 pounds or having
had gestational DM
7. Hypertension
8. Metabolic syndrome (high-density lipoprotein [HDL] cho-
lesterol < 35 mg/dL or triglycerides > 250 mg/dL, or both)
9. Polycystic ovary syndrome
10. Vascular disease
11. History of impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) or impaired
fasting glucose (IFG)
H. IFG and IGT: Metabolic stage between normal glucose
homeostasis and diabetes, sometimes called prediabetes
1. Patients with IFG or IGT have normal HgbA1c levels.
2. Both IFG and IGT are risk factors for the development of
diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
3. Both are associated with the metabolic syndrome (insulin resist-
ance, compensatory hyperinsulinemia, obesity, hypertension,
and dyslipidemia consisting of high triglycerides and low HDL).
4. Table 11–2 lists the defining criteria for IFG and IGT. 
182 /  CHAPTER 11
Table 11–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. D.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis  
Type 2 diabetes
Family history
Fasting plasma 
mellitus
Obesity
glucose
Hypertension
Ethnic group
Polyuria
Polydipsia
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Urinary tract
Urgency
Urinalysis
infection
Frequency
Culture
Hematuria
Excess fluid 
Polyuria
History
intake
Frequency
Bladder 
Urgency
Postvoid residual
dysfunction
Frequency
Urodynamic testing
Incontinence
Other Hypotheses
Diabetes 
Polyuria > 3 L/day
Water restriction test
insipidus
Primary 
Polyuria > 3 L/day
Water restriction test
polydipsia
Excess water intake 
Table 11–2. American Diabetes Association diagnostic
criteria for diabetes.
2-Hour Plasma Glucose
Fasting Plasma 
(After 75-g Oral 
Glucose
Glucose Load)
Normal
< 100 mg/dL
≤ 140 mg/dL
Impaired fasting 
100–125 mg/dL
glucose 
Impaired glucose 
140–199 mg/dL
tolerance 
Diabetes 
≥126 mg/dL
≥200 mg/dL
DIABETES /  183
I. Screening for diabetes
1. American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends
screening patients every 3 years beginning at age 45, espe-
cially those with a BMI ≥25 kg/m2; those with ≥2 risk
factors should be screened earlier and more often.
2. In 2008, the US Preventive Services Task Force recom-
mended screening asymptomatic adults with sustained BP
> 135/80 mm Hg. The Task Force concluded that evi-
dence is insufficient to assess the benefits and harms of
routine screening in asymptomatic patients with BP of
135/80 mm Hg or lower. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Table 11–2 lists the diagnostic criteria established by the
ADA; in addition, a random plasma glucose > 200 mg/dL in
a symptomatic patient is diagnostic.
B. The ADA recommends that all abnormal results be confirmed
with a second test.
C. The criteria for diagnosing diabetes were chosen based on the
observation that the risk for retinopathy increases substan-
tially at a fasting plasma glucose (FPG) of 126 mg/dL.
D. FPG measurements are more reproducible and easier to obtain
than oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) measurements.
1. Either test is acceptable for screening.
2. The OGTT, consisting of an FPG and a second glucose
measurement 2 hours after a 75-g oral glucose load, does
identify more prediabetic people than the FPG. 
3. The 2 tests do not necessarily detect the same individuals;
some patients will have normal results on 1 test but abnor-
mal results on the other.
E. The HgbA1c should not be used to screen for diabetes because
of a variable correlation with FPG. 
1. The LR−is unacceptably high for A1c levels of 6.1–6.5%
(Table 11–3).
2. However, the HgbA1c should always be ordered in patients
with hyperglycemia on a random sample, or a fasting glu-
cose > 100 mg/dL.
Treatment of IFG/IGT
A. The goals are to prevent or delay the onset of diabetes and to
modify other cardiac risk factors.
B. Large randomized trials have shown that lifestyle modifica-
tion or medication can prevent or delay diabetes.
1. Finnish patients with IGT were randomized to brief diet/
exercise counseling or intensive individualized instruction.
a. There was a 58% relative reduction in the development
of diabetes in the intensive group, (NNT = 22 to pre-
vent 1 case of DM over 1 year; NNT = 5 to prevent
1 case of DM over 5 years).
b. The study cohort was monitored for 3 years after the
intervention; the group of patients initially assigned to
the lifestyle intervention tended to continue their
lifestyle changes after the trial ended, and continued to
have a reduced risk of developing diabetes.
2. Patients in the United States (45% African American or
Hispanic) were randomized to intensive diet/exercise pro-
gram, metformin, or placebo.
a. There was a 58% relative reduction in the development
of DM in the intensive diet/exercise group and a 31%
relative reduction in metformin group.
b. NNT = 7 over 3 years to prevent 1 case of diabetes for
the intensive diet/exercise group, and NNT = 14 for
the metformin group.
3. Acarbose, orlistat, and rosiglitazone have also been stud-
ied, but the ADA does not recommend their use in dia-
betes prevention.
Lifestyle modification is the best way to prevent or
delay the onset of diabetes.
C. Recommended lifestyle modification goals are 30 minutes of
modest physical activity daily and loss of 5–10% of body weight.
D. The ADA recommends considering the addition of metformin
in patients who have a BMI > 35, are under 60 years old, and
have combined IFG and IGT plus at least 1 other risk factor. 
E. The goal of hypertension therapy in patients with IFG or
IGT is to achieve a BP < 140/90 mm Hg. 
F. Lipids should be treated according to National Cholesterol
Education Program (NCEP) guidelines for nondiabetic
patients (see Chapter 20, Hypertension).
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mrs. D’s random glucose is elevated but is not diagnos-
tic of diabetes. She reports that even though she is uri-
nating often, the urine volumes are small. You ask her to
return for more testing:
FPG, 120 mg/dL
HgbA1c, 5.8%
Urinalysis: negative for protein, glucose, and blood; no
WBCs or bacteria; specific gravity, 1.015.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, type 2 DM? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
Table 11–3. Test characteristics of the HgbA1c in the
diagnosis of diabetes.
HgbA1c
Sensitivity
Specificity 
Cutoff (%)
(%)
(%)
LR+
LR−
5.6
83.4
84.4
5.35
0.2
6.1
63.2
97.4
24.3
0.38
6.5
42.8
99.6
107
0.57
7.1
28.3
99.9
283
0.72
184 /  CHAPTER 11
Mrs. D does not have diabetes, but she does have IFG. This does
not cause glycosuria of a degree sufficient to cause urinary fre-
quency. A urinary tract infection is ruled out by the normal uri-
nalysis. She has increased her water consumption, so excess fluid
intake is a likely cause of her symptoms. Bladder dysfunction
should be considered if her symptoms do not resolve with reduc-
tion in fluid intake. Diabetes insipidus and primary polydipsia are
rare diseases that do not need to be considered unless she has a
documented urinary output of more than 3 L/day. The next diag-
nostic test should be reducing her fluid intake.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mrs. D stops forcing herself to drink extra water, and her
urination pattern returns to normal. She is very con-
cerned about her elevated FPG and wants to know how to
prevent progression to diabetes. Her BMI is 30 kg/m2,
and her fasting lipid panel shows total cholesterol of
220 mg/dL; HDL, 38 mg/dL; triglycerides, 250 mg/dL;
and low-density lipoprotein (LDL), 132 mg/dL. You refer
her to a nutritionist for dietary counseling and recom-
mend that she walk 30 minutes a day 5 days a week.
When she returns to see you 4 months later, she has lost
8 pounds. Her FPG is 112 mg/dL; total cholesterol
197 mg/dL, HDL, 42 mg/dL; triglycerides, 150 mg/dL; and
LDL, 125 mg/dL. 
FOLLOW-UP OF MRS. D
1
Mrs. D returns 5 years later, having lived in another city
in the meantime. She reports that she did quite well with
her diet and exercise program for several years, main-
taining a 10% weight loss. However, over the last couple of
years, she has not been able to continue her exercise pro-
gram or be as careful about her diet because of the
stresses of caring for her chronically ill mother as well as
working and caring for her own family. Her mother died
recently, so Mrs. D has moved back. She knows that she
has gained weight and is especially worried about her
blood sugar level because she did not have time to see a
doctor herself during her mother’s illness.
On physical exam, her BMI is 34 kg/m2, and her BP is
155/88 mm Hg. Her lungs are clear, and on cardiac exam
you hear an S4 but no S3 or murmurs. Abdominal exam is
normal, and there is no peripheral edema. Her peripheral
pulses are normal, and there are no ulcerations on her
feet. She does have tinea pedis. Her fingerstick glucose
measurement is 335 mg/dL.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Clearly, Mrs. D now has type 2 DM. At this point, in addition to
starting treatment, the clinician should focus on identifying and
managing diabetic complications and associated cardiovascular
risk factors rather than ruling out other diagnoses (Table 11–4).
1
Mrs. D does not report any vision loss, numbness, edema,
dyspnea, or chest pain.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Diabetic Complications
1. Retinopathy
Textbook Presentation
Most patients with retinopathy are asymptomatic. Other patients
experience either gradual or sudden vision loss.
Table 11–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. D’s follow-up.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis: Diabetic Complications  
Retinopathy
Asymptomatic
Ophthalmologic 
Decreased vision
exam
Nephropathy
Long duration 
Albumin/creatinine 
diabetes mellitus
ratio
Poor glycemic control
Hypertension
Peripheral 
Paresthesias
Monofilament test
neuropathy
Diabetic foot 
Neuropathy
Physical exam
ulcers
Peripheral arterial disease
Vascular disease
Coronary artery 
Stress test
disease
Ankle-brachial 
Heart failure
index 
Peripheral 
Carotid duplex 
arterial disease
ultrasound
Transient ischemic 
attack/cerebrovascular 
accident symptoms
Active Alternatives that Increase Cardiovascular Risk—
Must Not Miss:
Hypertension
Physical exam
Hyperlipidemia
Fasting lipid panel
Smoking
History
Obesity
Body mass index
DIABETES /  185
Disease Highlights
A. Most common cause of new cases of blindness in adults aged
20–74 years
B. Occurs in nearly all patients with type 1 and > 60% of
patients with type 2 DM after 20 years.
C. Stages of diabetic retinopathy (DR)
1. Nonproliferative (NPDR)
a. Earlier stage of DR
b. Earliest signs are microaneurysms and retinal
hemorrhages
c. Progressive capillary nonperfusion leads to ischemia,
manifested by increasing cotton wool spots, venous
beading, and intraretinal vascular abnormalities.
2. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR)
a. Most advanced form of DR
b. Progressive retinal ischemia causes formation of new
blood vessels on the retina or optic disk
c. The new vessels bleed, leading to vision loss because of
vitreous hemorrhage, fibrosis, or retinal detachment.
d. Present in 50% of persons with type 1 and 15% of
those with type 2 who have had DM for 15 years
3. Diabetic macular edema (DME)
a. Can develop at any stage of retinopathy
b. Now the leading cause of vision loss in persons with
diabetes
c. Increased vascular permeability causes plasma leaks
from the macular vessels, leading to swelling and for-
mation of hard exudates at the central retina.
d. Incidence over 10 years 
(1) 20% in persons with type 1 DM 
(2) 25% in persons with type 2 DM who require
insulin  
(3) 14% in persons with type 2 DM who do not
require insulin 
D. Risk factors
1. Most consistently identified risk factors are duration of
DM, elevated HgbA1c level, hypertension, hyperlipidemia,
pregnancy, nephropathy
2. Less consistently identified risk factors include obesity, smok-
ing, moderate alcohol consumption, physical inactivity
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Evaluation should include dilated indirect ophthalmoscopy or
fundus photography, or both, by an ophthalmologist 
B. Patients with type 1 diabetes should have an exam within
3–5 years of disease onset, followed by at least annual
exams.
C. Patients with type 2 diabetes should have an exam at the time
of diagnosis, followed by at least annual exams.
All patients with type 2 DM need eye exams by an
ophthalmologist at least annually.
Treatment
A. Glycemic control
1. In persons with type 1 DM without retinopathy, the risk
of developing DR is reduced 76% by tight control
(HgbA1c 7.2 vs 9.1% in the Diabetes Control and Com-
plications Trial [DCCT]).
2. In persons with type 1 DM with retinopathy, the risk of
progression is reduced by 54% by tight control.
3. In persons with type 2 DM, better control reduces the risk
of microvascular complications (retinopathy and nephropa-
thy) by 16–25%. (HgbA1c 7% vs 7.9% in the United King-
dom Prospective Diabetes Study [UKPDS] [1998]; HgbA1c
6.5 vs 7.2% in the ADVANCE trial [2008].)
4. In persons with type 2 DM, there is a 35% reduction in
the risk of microvascular complications for every percent-
age point decrease in HgbA1c.
B. Better BP control reduces the risk of progression of retinopathy.
C. Aspirin neither improves nor worsens retinopathy.
D. Pan-retinal photocoagulation is indicated for PDR and
selected cases of severe NPDR; focal laser photocoagulation is
indicated for DME.
E. Vitrectomy (removal of the vitreous, the gel-like substance in
the eye) is indicated for selected patients who do not respond
to photocoagulation and for patients who have type 1 DM
with DR and vitreous hemorrhage.
F. Intravitreal steroids may have a role in diffuse DME not
responsive to laser treatment.
2. Neuropathy
Textbook Presentation
Diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) classically presents as
paresthesias or burning pain in a “glove-stocking” distribution.
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy can manifest in a variety of ways,
including orthostatic dizziness, diarrhea, urinary incontinence,
and gastroparesis.
Disease Highlights
A. Types of DPN
1. Symmetric distal polyneuropathy (most common)
2. Focal neuropathies
a. Cranial (0.05% of mononeuropathies)
(1) Usually cranial nerve III or VI
(2) Usually acute and transient
(3) Caused by ischemia
b. Thoracolumbar
c. Limb
(1) Median nerve most common site (5.8% of
mononeuropathies)
(2) Ulnar (2.1%), femoral, and peroneal also affected
3. Diabetic amyotrophy (pain, severe asymmetric muscle
weakness, and wasting of the iliopsoas and quadriceps)
B. Epidemiology of symmetric distal polyneuropathy 
1. Affects up to 50% of persons with diabetes, with chronic
neuropathic pain in 20% of patients with diabetes for over
10 years
186 /  CHAPTER 11
2. Severity is related to duration of disease, degree of glycemic
control, and presence of hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
3. DPN is an independent risk factor for foot ulceration and
amputation; patients with neuropathy have a 15% lifetime
risk of amputation.
C. Clinical manifestations of symmetric distal polyneuropathy 
1. History
a. Up to 50% of patients asymptomatic
b. Burning, shooting, or lancinating pain
c. Paresthesias, hyperesthesias
d. Often worse at night
e. When symptoms ascend to the knees, upper extremity
symptoms start
2. Physical exam
a. Loss of vibration, pain, pressure, and temperature
sensation 
b. Loss of ankle reflexes
c. Distal muscle atrophy late in the course
3. Charcot joints develop, usually in the tarsometatarsal
region, in 10% of patients.
D. Differential diagnosis symmetric distal polyneuropathy
1. Consider other causes of neuropathy if
a. Neuropathy develops before the onset of or early in the
course of the diabetes
b. Patient has a history of excellent glycemic control
c. Neuropathy is asymmetric
d. There is proximal or upper extremity involvement dis-
proportionate to distal lower extremity involvement
2. Be sure to check for other treatable causes (eg, hypothy-
roidism and vitamin B12 deficiency), even in patients with
long-standing diabetes.
Think about other causes of neuropathy in diabetic
patients.
E. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy can affect any organ inner-
vated by the autonomic nervous system.
1. Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy: many possible
manifestations
a. Reduced heart rate variability; associated with increased
risk of silent ischemia and cardiac death
b. Fixed heart rate
c. Resting sinus tachycardia
d. Inadequate increase in heart rate/BP with exercise
e. Postural hypotension with systolic BP drop of > 30 mm
Hg, without an appropriate heart rate response
f. Intraoperative cardiac instability
2. Gustatory sweating
a. Facial sweating, often accompanied by flushing, that
occurs after eating
b. Generally occurs in patients with nephropathy or
peripheral neuropathy
c. Cause unknown
3. GI dysfunction
a. Reduced esophageal motility
b. Gastroparesis
(1) Abnormality of gastric motility leading to delayed
gastric emptying
(2) Symptoms include nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
postprandial fullness, early satiety.
(3) Poor correlation between demonstrated motility
abnormalities and symptoms
c. Diabetic diarrhea
(1) Characterized by intermittent, brown watery,
voluminous stools, occasionally accompanied by
tenesmus
(2) Can be episodic, separated by periods of normal
bowel movements or constipation
(3) Rare in the absence of other manifestations of neu-
ropathy, either peripheral or autonomic
d. Constipation
(1) Constipation specifically resulting from auto-
nomic neuropathy occurs in 20% of patients with
type 2 DM
(2) Caused by abnormality in autonomic neural con-
trol of colonic motility
e. Anorectal dysfunction
(1) Results in fecal incontinence, even in the absence
of diarrhea
(2) Patients can generally sense the presence of stool,
but cannot prevent passage
4. Genitourinary dysfunction
a. Bladder dysfunction
(1) Initially motor function normal, but sensation of
bladder distention impaired
(2) Then, detrusor muscle hypocontractility occurs, lead-
ing to urinary retention and overflow incontinence.
b. Erectile dysfunction
(1) Present in 28–45% of diabetic men
(2) Most common organic cause of erectile dysfunction
(3) Risk factors include duration of DM, glycemic
control, smoking, other diabetic complications.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Symmetric distal polyneuropathy
1. Nerve conduction studies are the gold standard.
2. Several physical exam maneuvers have been compared
with nerve conduction studies.
a. Semmes-Weinstein monofilament examination
(1) Apply a 5.07/10-g monofilament to a noncallused
site on the dorsum of the first toe just proximal to
the nail bed.
(2) Repeat 4 times on both feet in an arrhythmic
manner.
(3) Add up the total number of times the monofila-
ment is perceived by the patient (score range = 0–8).
b. On–off vibration testing
(1) Apply a vibrating 128-Hz tuning fork to the bony
prominence at the dorsum of the first toe just
proximal to the nail bed.
DIABETES /  187
(2) Repeat twice on each foot.
(3) Add up the total number of times the patient per-
ceives the application of the vibrating tuning fork and
the cessation of the vibration (score range = 0–8).
c. Timed vibration testing
(1) Apply a vibrating 128-Hz tuning fork to the same
location used for the on–off vibration test.
(2) Ask the patient to report the time at which vibration
diminished beyond perception, and compare with the
number of seconds perceived by the examiner when
the tuning fork is applied to the examiner’s thumb.
(3) Record number of times patient’s perception time
less than examiner’s (score range = 0–8).
d. Superficial pain sensation
(1) Apply a sterile sharp to the same sites used for the
monofilament.
(2) Repeat 4 times on each foot.
(3) Add up the total number of times the patient did not
perceive the painful stimulus (score range = 0–8).
e. All tests have high LR+; monofilament and timed
vibration have best LR−(Table 11–5).
f. Monofilament more reproducible than timed vibration.
The monofilament is the preferred physical
exam method for detecting diabetic peripheral
neuropathy.
3. The absence of ankle reflexes has a sensitivity of 60% and
specificity of 90% in 1 study, compared with a clinical
gold standard (LR+ = 6; LR−= 0.44).
4. Another study compared 3 criteria (symptoms, abnormal
temperature sensation, and absent ankle reflexes) to a clinical
gold standard; if 2 of the 3 criteria were present, the sensitiv-
ity was 87% and specificity 91% (LR+ = 10.8; LR−= 0.14).
5. The ADA recommends screening for neuropathy at least
annually by checking ankle reflexes and assessing sensation
by testing pinprick, temperature, vibration, and pressure
sensation with a monofilament.
B. Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
1. Cardiovascular autonomic neuropathy
a. There are standardized ways to measure heart rate
variability.
b. Postural change in systolic BP is used to diagnose
orthostatic hypotension caused by diabetic autonomic
neuropathy; the systolic BP is measured with the
patient supine and again after 2 minutes of standing. 
(1) A drop of < 10 mm Hg is normal. 
(2) A drop of 10–29 mm Hg is borderline. 
(3) A drop of > 30 mm Hg is definitely abnormal.
2. Gustatory sweating is diagnosed by history.
3. GI dysfunction
a. Esophageal dysmotility: Esophagogastroduodenoscopy
and manometry
b. Gastroparesis: Diagnosed clinically or by a “gastric
emptying” study, consisting of double-isotope scintig-
raphy of either solids or liquids
c. Diabetic diarrhea: Rule out other causes of chronic
diarrhea.
d. Anorectal dysfunction: Anorectal manometry and
defecography can be done to document abnormalities.
4. Genitourinary dysfunction
a. Urinary bladder dysfunction: Ultrasound and urody-
namic testing
b. Erectile dysfunction: History
Treatment
A. Tight glycemic control 
1. Definitely prevents and improves neuropathy in persons
with type 1 DM (RR reduction of 60%, NNT of 15 to
prevent 1 case of neuropathy in tightly controlled patients) 
2. Possibly prevents and improves neuropathy in persons
with type 2 DM
B. Otherwise, treatment is symptomatic.
1. Peripheral neuropathy
a. Tricyclic antidepressants, gabapentin, and pregabalin
all shown to effectively reduce neuropathic pain
b. Tramadol and opioids also effective
c. Capsaicin possibly effective
d. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs generally not
effective
2. Autonomic neuropathy
a. Cardiovascular
(1) Orthostatic hypotension is usually the most dis-
abling symptom.
(a) Patients should raise head of bed, and rise
slowly.
(b) Patients can try an elasticized garment that
extends from the feet to the costal margins.
(c) Fludrocortisone is sometimes used, but must
beware of supine hypertension, excessive salt,
and water retention
(2) Cardioselective β-blockers sometimes helpful
b. Sweating: no specific treatment available; clonidine
may be effective.
Table 11–5. Physical exam findings in diabetic peripheral
neuropathy.
Able to perceive 
Able to perceive 
stimulus ≥4 times 
stimulus ≤3 times 
(normal test)
(abnormal test)
Test
Sensitivity (%)
LR−
Specificity (%)
LR+
Monofilament 
77
0.34
96
10.2
Timed 
80
0.33
98
18.5
vibration 
Superficial 
59
0.5
97
9.2
pain
On-off 
53
0.51
99
26.6
vibration
188 /  CHAPTER 11
c. Esophageal dysmotility: can try prokinetic agents such
as metoclopramide
d. Gastroparesis
(1) Severe gastroparesis is very difficult to manage.
(2) Small meals sometimes help.
(3) Prokinetic agents, such as metoclopramide or
erythromycin, sometimes are effective.
(4) Gastric electrical stimulation is being studied for
refractory cases.
e. Constipation
(1) Increase fiber
(2) Drug choices include lactulose, polyethylene gly-
col, stool softeners.
(3) Avoid senna, cascara due to stimulant activity
f. Urinary bladder dysfunction
(1) Bethanecol
(2) Intermittent self-catheterization
g. Erectile dysfunction: sildenafil and other similar agents
3. Nephropathy
Textbook Presentation
Diabetic nephropathy is asymptomatic until it is so advanced that
the patient has symptoms of renal failure.
Disease Highlights
A. Occurs in 20–40% of patients with diabetes
B. The most common cause of end-stage renal disease (ESRD)
in the United States and Europe, accounting for about 40%
of new cases of ESRD.
C. Definitions (based on spot collection and calculation of the
albumin/creatinine ratio in mcg/mg)
1. Normal < 30
2. Microalbuminuria = 30–299
3. Macroalbuminuria (overt nephropathy) ≥300
D. Natural history: much better defined for type 1 than for type
2 DM
1. Type 1 DM
a. Renal enlargement and hyperfunction at onset of dia-
betes; continues for 5–15 years
b. Microalbuminuria appears 10–15 years after onset of
DM; glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and BP initially
normal.
c. Over the ensuing 10–15 years, 80% of patients
progress to macroalbuminuria; GFR declines and
hypertension develops.
d. ESRD develops in 50% of patients with overt
nephropathy within 10 years and in 75% by 20 years.
2. Type 2 DM
a. Natural history is less well defined because onset of
type 2 DM is usually not well defined, and other causes
of renal insufficiency (such as hypertension and vascu-
lar disease) are more common.
b. 20–40% of patients with microalbuminuria progress to
overt nephropathy.
c. 20% have ESRD within 20 years of the onset of overt
nephropathy.
E. Risk factors for development of nephropathy
1. Poor glycemic control
2. Hypertension
3. Long duration of diabetes
4. Male sex
5. Ethnic predisposition (Native American, African Ameri-
can, Hispanic [especially Mexican American])
F. Patients with microalbuminuria have an increased risk of car-
diovascular events.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. ADA recommends annual screening for microalbuminuria
beginning at the time of diagnosis for patients with type 2
DM and at year 5 for patients with type 1 DM.
B. The recommended screening is a spot urinary albumin/crea-
tinine ratio
1. There is diurnal variation, so first-void or early-
morning specimens are best; otherwise, try to obtain
confirmatory specimen at same time of day as initial
specimen.
2. Short-term hyperglycemia, exercise, urinary tract infec-
tion, marked hypertension, heart failure, and acute
febrile illness can cause transient elevations in albumin
excretion.
3. All abnormal tests should be confirmed by a second
test.
4. For morning specimens, sensitivity ranges from 70% to
100% and specificity ranges from 91% to 98%.  
5. For random specimens, sensitivity ranges from 56% to
97% and specificity ranges from 81% to 92%.
C. It is not clear whether it is necessary to measure the albu-
min/creatinine ratio annually in patients being treated
with an ACE inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker
(ARB).
D. All patients should have a serum creatinine checked at least
annually.
Treatment
A. Tight glycemic control reduces nephropathy.
1. Type 1 DM
a. Incidence of microalbuminuria reduced by 34%
(NNT = 83) in patients without retinopathy and by
43% (NNT = 47) in patients with retinopathy
b. Incidence of macroalbuminuria reduced by 56%
(NNT = 125) in patients with retinopathy
2. Type 2 DM
a. Better control reduces the risk of microvascular com-
plications (retinopathy and nephropathy) by
16–25%. (HgbA1c 7% vs 7.9% in the UKPDS
[1998]; HgbA1c 6.5% vs 7.2% in the ADVANCE
trial [2008].) 
b. NNT = 36 over 10 years in the UKPDS; NNT = 66
over 5 years in the ADVANCE trial
c. The microvascular complication rate was 58% for
patients with an HgbA1c ≥10% and 6.1% for patients
with an HgbA1c < 6.0% (UKPDS).
d. Microvascular complication rate decreases by 37% for
every 1% reduction in HgbA1c.
DIABETES /  189
B. BP control and choice of agents
1. BP should be < 130/80 mm Hg.
2. Either ACE inhibitors or ARBs should be used
a. ACE inhibitors have been shown to reduce 
(1) Progression to nephropathy in type 1 and type 2
diabetics with hypertension and albuminuria
(2) Progression to microalbuminuria in type 2 diabet-
ics with hypertension and normoalbuminuria 
(3) Cardiovascular events in patients with type 2 diabetes
b. ARBs have been shown to reduce progression to
nephropathy in type 2 diabetics with hypertension and
albuminuria.
C. Protein restriction to about 10% of daily calories may reduce
progression of overt nephropathy.
D. Refer to a nephrologist if the creatinine clearance is < 60 mL/min
or hypertension cannot be controlled.
4. Diabetic Foot Ulcers
Textbook Presentation
A patient with peripheral neuropathy is unaware of minor trauma
and the beginning of plantar ulceration. By the time the ulcer is
discovered incidentally, it is often advanced, sometimes with asso-
ciated osteomyelitis.
Disease Highlights
A. Lifetime risk of developing an ulcer is about 15%.
B. 90% of patients with ulcers have neuropathy, and 15–20%
have peripheral vascular disease.
C. Tend to occur at pressure points, so plantar surface and sites
of calluses are common locations
1. Venous ulcers generally occur above the medial or lateral
malleolus
2. Arterial ulcers generally occur on the toes or shins
D. Risk factors
1. Duration of diabetes > 10 years
2. Male sex
3. Poor glycemic control
4. Coexisting cardiovascular, renal, or retinal complication
5. Peripheral neuropathy
6. Altered biomechanics
7. Evidence of increased pressure on the foot
8. Bony deformity of the foot or ankle
9. Peripheral vascular disease
10. A history of ulcers or amputation
11. Severe nail pathology
E. Pathophysiology
1. Repetitive mechanical stress occurs as a result of altered
biomechanics, foot deformities, ill-fitting shoes.
2. Peripheral neuropathy causes loss of protective sensation,
so the patient is unaware of the incipient ulceration.
3. Ischemia, resulting from macrovascular peripheral arterial
disease (commonly in the tibioperoneal vessels) or
microvascular dysfunction from autonomic neuropathy,
inhibits healing and promotes progression.
F. Classification
1. Non–limb-threatening
a. Superficial infection, purulent discharge, and minimal
(< 2 cm extension from the ulcer) or absent cellulitis
b. No systemic toxicity (fever, leukocytosis, severe hyper-
glycemia, or osteomyelitis)
2. Limb-threatening
a. Ulceration to deep tissues, extensive purulent drainage,
cellulitis extending more than 2 cm from the ulcer, and
lymphangitis
b. Systemic toxicity and significant ischemia, with or
without gangrene, present
3. Life-threatening
a. Ulceration to deep tissues, extensive purulent drainage,
cellulitis, necrosis, gangrene, osteomyelitis
b. Marked systemic toxicity, including septic shock
G. Microbiology
1. Non–limb-threatening infections average 2 species/ulcer,
but are often monomicrobial.
2. Limb-threatening and life-threatening infections are gen-
erally polymicrobial.
3. Staphylococcus aureus is most common organism and is
present in 50% of infections.
4. Streptococci present in one-third of cases.
5. Gram-negative organisms, especially Proteus, Klebsiella,
Escherichia coli, and Pseudomonas, present in polymicrobial
infections.
6. Anaerobic gram-positive cocci and Bacteroides present in
up to 80% of polymicrobial infections.
H. Osteomyelitis develops in 15% of patients with foot ulcers. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. ADA recommendations include at least annual foot examina-
tions that should include screening for neuropathy and assessing
foot structure, biomechanics, vascular status, and skin integrity.
1. Patients with neuropathy should have a foot exam at every
visit.
2. ADA recommends screening for peripheral arterial disease
with ankle-brachial index measurements in patients over
age 50 and those under age 50 with other vascular risk fac-
tors in addition to diabetes.
You cannot examine the feet of your diabetic
patients too often!
B. Culturing ulcers
1. Can be difficult to distinguish between colonizing organ-
isms and true pathogens 
2. Deep cultures of the ulcer or the bone are more reliable
but are more invasive to perform
3. Swab cultures identify the same pathogens as bone culture
in only 19–36% of patients.
4. If the patient is responding to empiric therapy, it is not
necessary to culture.
190 /  CHAPTER 11
C. Diagnosing complications
1. Cellulitis: clinical diagnosis (see Chapter 15, Edema)
2. Osteomyelitis (Table 11–6)
a. Open bone biopsy with culture is the gold standard.
b. Needle bone biopsy subject to sampling error (sensitiv-
ity, 87%; specificity, 93%; LR+, 12.4; LR−, 0.14)
c. Being able to see bone or to probe the ulcer down to bone
increases the probability the patient has osteomyelitis
d. C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR), CBC, blood cultures not sufficiently sensi-
tive or specific to diagnose osteomyelitis.
e. MRI is the imaging procedure with the best test char-
acteristics; bone scan and WBC scans are less specific. 
MRI scan is the best imaging procedure to diagnose
osteomyelitis in a patient with a diabetic foot ulcer.
A normal CBC, CRP, or ESR does not rule out
osteomyelitis.
Treatment
A. Preventive foot care
1. Improve glycemic control to reduce risk of neuropathy.
2. Reduce vascular risk factors (smoking cessation, BP con-
trol, lipid management, glycemic control).
3. Examine the feet of high-risk patients at every visit
(patients with peripheral neuropathy, evidence of
increased pressure, limited joint mobility, bony deformity,
severe nail pathology, peripheral vascular disease, or a his-
tory of ulcers or amputation).
4. Examine the feet of low-risk patients at least annually.
5. Ensure patients wear well-fitted shoes.
6. Educate patients regarding need for daily visual inspection
of feet.
7. Refer to podiatrist for débridement of calluses, assessment
of bony deformities.
B. Treatment of ulcers
1. Treat any infection.
a. Patients with non–limb-threatening infections
(1) Can generally be treated with oral antibiotics in
the outpatient setting
(2) Oral antibiotic choices include clindamycin,
amoxicillin–clavulanate, and fluoroquinolones;
the increasing prevalence of community-acquired
methicillin-resistant S aureus (MRSA) should be
considered when choosing empiric therapy.
(3) Patients should be reassessed after 24–48 hours
and switched to IV therapy if there is no response.
b. All other patients should be hospitalized and given IV
antibiotics.
(1) IV antibiotic choices include ampicillin–sulbactam,
ticarcillin–clavulanate, levofloxacin, imipenem– cilastin,
with vancomycin often added to cover MRSA.
(2) 10–14 days of therapy are generally adequate for
patients without osteomyelitis; those with
osteomyelitis need 3–10 weeks.
(3) Can often switch from IV to oral therapy if
patients are improving
2. Determine need for revascularization, and revascularize as
early as possible in patients with treatable peripheral vas-
cular disease.
3. Heal the ulcer.
a. Off loading: use orthotics or fiberglass casts to remove
pressure from the wound while allowing the patient to
remain active.
b. Débride ulcers (surgically or with débriding agents
such as hydrogels).
c. Control edema.
d. Growth factors are being studied.
4. Institute preventive measures once the ulcer has healed.
A multidisciplinary approach, including internal
medicine, vascular surgery, and podiatry is necessary
for the optimal treatment of diabetic foot ulcers. 
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
The ophthalmologist reports that Mrs. D has no
retinopathy. Her neurologic exam, including monofilament
testing, is normal. She does not complain of orthostatic
dizziness or any GI or genitourinary symptoms. She has
bilateral bunions but no calluses or ulcers. Her albu-
min–creatinine ratio is 50 mcg/mg, confirmed on repeat
testing. Her HgbA1c is 9.1%.
Table 11–6. Test characteristics for the diagnosis of
osteomyelitis in patients with diabetic foot ulcers.
LR+
LR−
Physical Exam Findings
Bone exposure
9.2
0.7
Ulcer area > 2 cm2
7.2
0.48
Positive probe to bone
6.4
0.39
Ulcer inflammation (erythema,swelling,purulence)
1.5
0.84
Laboratory Tests
ESR > 70 mm/h
11
0.34
Imaging Studies
MRI
5.1
0.12
Radiographs 
2.3
0.63
DIABETES /  191
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, diabetic complica-
tions? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
The evaluation for diabetic complications is complete. Mrs. D
has no evidence of retinopathy, neuropathy, or diabetic foot dis-
ease. She does have microalbuminuria. However, before formu-
lating a treatment plan for Mrs. D, it is necessary to assess for the
presence or absence of other cardiovascular risk factors and car-
diovascular disease:
1. Dyslipidemia
2. Hypertension
3. Obesity
4. Smoking
5. Coronary artery disease (CAD)
6. Cerebrovascular disease
7. Peripheral vascular disease
Table 11–7 outlines a summary of testing that must be per-
formed on all patients with diabetes.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mrs. D has no symptoms of vascular disease on careful
questioning, and her exercise tolerance is more than 1 mile.
Her fasting lipid panel shows total cholesterol of
230 mg/dL, HDL of 45 mg/dL, triglycerides of 200 mg/dL,
and LDL of 145 mg/dL. You refer Mrs. D to a diabetes edu-
cator and a nutritionist for instruction about diet and
exercise. You also prescribe metformin for the diabetes and
atorvastatin for the hyperlipidemia. Because she has
hypertension and microalbuminuria, you elect to start an
ACE inhibitor, lisinopril, to treat her hypertension. You also
recommend that she start taking aspirin, 81 mg daily. Over
the next 12–18 months, Mrs. D loses 5 pounds. You increase
the dose of metformin, add glipizide, and her HgbA1c
decreases to 6.7%. After increasing the dose of lisinopril
and adding hydrochlorothiazide, her BP is 128/80 mm Hg.
Her LDL is now 85 mg/dL.
Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes
The treatment of type 2 diabetes involves not only the treatment
of the hyperglycemia but the management of associated compli-
cations and cardiovascular risk factors as well. According to sur-
vey data, only 37% of participants reach HgbA1c goals, 35.8%
reach BP goals, and 48% reach cholesterol goals; only 7.3% reach
all 3 goals.
It is common for patients to require 6–7 medica-
tions to meet accepted treatment goals.
Treatment of Hyperglycemia
A. Treatment goals
1. The ADA recommends treating to a HgbA1c < 7.0%
a. HgbA1c levels < 7% have been clearly shown to reduce
microvascular events in patients with type 2 DM (see
data above).
b. Intensive control has not been consistently shown to
reduce macrovascular events; intensive control may be
harmful in older diabetics with cardiovascular disease,
and may be beneficial in younger persons in whom dia-
betes was recently diagnosed.
(1) UKPDS (1998) 
(a) About 4200 persons with newly diagnosed
type 2 DM without CV disease, mean age 53,
randomized to conventional therapy (HgbA1c
7.9%) vs intensive therapy with sulfonylureas
with or without insulin (HgbA1c 7.0%) and
monitored for 10 years
(b) RR of myocardial infarction (MI) in the inten-
sive group = 0.84 (95% CI, 0.71–1.00)
(c) A separate study arm randomized obese
patients to receive metformin or conventional
therapy; there was a significant reduction in
MI with metformin (RR = 0.61, 0.41–0.89)
Table 11–7. Summary of testing and monitoring
recommended for patients with diabetes.
Condition
Required Test/Action
Retinopathy
Ophthalmologic exam1
Peripheral 
Monofilament testing, ankle reflexes, vibration 
neuropathy
sense1
Nephropathy
Albumin/creatinine ratio, serum creatinine1
Diabetic foot 
Foot exam1
ulcers
Dyslipidemia 
Fasting total cholesterol, HDL,
triglycerides, LDL1
Hypertension
BP measurement1
Smoking
Obtain history and counsel cessation1
Obesity 
Measure weight and calculate BMI1
Coronary artery 
Assess for symptoms; screening asymptomatic 
disease
patients controversial
Cerebrovascular 
Carotid duplex ultrasound in patients with 
disease
symptoms
Peripheral vascular ABIs in patients over 50 and those under 
disease
50 with other vascular risk factors in addition 
to diabetes
1Should be performed at least annually and may need to be done more often in
patients with abnormalities.
ABI, ankle-brachial index; BMI, body mass index; HDL, high-density lipoprotein;
LDL, low-density lipoprotein.
192 /  CHAPTER 11
(2) UKPDS 10-year follow up (2008)
(a) About 3200 of the original 4200 patients
were monitored for an additional 10 years
after the intervention trial ended, with
patients returning to their personal physicians
for diabetes care
(b) Endpoints included death from any cause,
diabetes-related death, MI, stroke, peripheral
arterial disease, microvascular disease, any
diabetes-related endpoint.
(c) The mean HgbA1c was about 8% in all
groups (conventional, sulfonylurea/insulin,
metformin) 1 year after the intervention trial
ended
(d) Patients originally assigned to sulfonylurea/
insulin had significant reductions in all end-
points measured (RR for MI 0.85, 95% CI
0.74–0.97; RR for death from any cause =
0.87, 0.79–0.96)
(e) Patients originally assigned to metformin had
significant reductions in any diabetes-related
endpoint, death from any cause (RR = 0.73,
0.59–0.89), diabetes-related death, and MI
(RR = 0.67, 0.51–0.89)
(f) These results suggest a “legacy” effect from ini-
tial intensive therapy in type 2 diabetes, simi-
lar to that seen in long-term follow-up of type
1 diabetics.
(3) ADVANCE trial (2008)
(a) About 11,000 type 2 diabetics with cardiovas-
cular disease or multiple risk factors, mean age
66, randomized to intensive control with a
sulfonylurea-based regimen (HgbA1c 6.5%) vs
conventional control (HgbA1c 7.2%) and
monitored for 5 years
(b) No difference in macrovascular events (RR =
0.94, 0.84–1.06)
(4) ACCORD trial (2008)
(a) About 10,000 type 2 diabetics with cardiovas-
cular disease or multiple risk factors, mean age
62, randomized to intensive control (HgbA1c
6.4%) vs conventional control (7.5%) and
monitored for 3.5 years
(b) No difference in primary endpoint (nonfa-
tal MI, nonfatal stroke, or cardiovascular
death)
(c) Increase in any cause death with intensive treat-
ment (RR = 1.22 (1.01–1.46), NNH = 100)
(d) Increase in cardiovascular death with intensive
treatment (RR = 1.35 (1.04–1.76), NNH = 125)
(e) Most patients in the intensive group received
rosiglitazone, which is associated with
increased risk of MI. 
2. Goals should be modified for frail elderly, in whom
avoidance of hypoglycemia and optimization of func-
tional status may be more important than tight
glycemic control.
B. Monitoring
1. HgbA1c levels every 3–6 months (Table 11–8 shows corre-
lation between plasma glucose and HgbA1c.)
a. The HgbA1c is altered unpredictably by Hgb variants.
b. Processes that shorten RBC life span, such as kidney
disease, liver disease, hemolytic anemia, hemoglo-
binopathies, and recovery from blood loss, will
decrease the HgbA1c.
c. Processes that slow erythropoiesis, such as iron defi-
ciency anemia, increase the HgbA1c.
d. 50% of HgbA1c is determined by glycemia during the
month before the measurement, 25% from the 30–60 days
before, and 25% from 60–90 days before.
2. Home glucose monitoring
a. Patients taking insulin should test blood levels several
times a day (fasting, before lunch, before dinner, and
before bed) if not well controlled and perhaps less often
if well controlled.
b. Optimal frequency for patients taking oral agents is
unclear; recent studies suggest home glucose moni-
toring does not improve HgbA1c levels in patients
with type 2 diabetes taking oral agents but does
increase anxiety.
C. Lifestyle modification
1. Weight loss (goal of at least 10% of body weight), diet mod-
ification, and exercise (goal of at least 150 minutes/week)
are the foundations of all treatment for diabetes.
2. Best instituted in conjunction with a certified diabetes
educator or nutritionist
D. Oral hypoglycemics
1. Sulfonylureas 
a. Examples: glyburide, glipizide, glimepiride
b. Increase insulin secretion.
c. Average decrease in HgbA1c about 1–2%
d. Side effects include weight gain (2–5 kg) and hypo-
glycemia, especially in the elderly, patients with
Table 11–8. Correlation between plasma glucose and
HgbA1c.
Mean Plasma Glucose 
HgbA1c (%)
(mg/dL)
6
135
7
170
8
205
9
240
10
275
11
310
12
345
DIABETES /  193
reduced renal function, and those with erratic eat-
ing habits.
e. Shown to reduce microvascular outcomes; no change
in cardiovascular events. 
f. Can be used as monotherapy or in combination with
insulin or other oral agents (except non-sulfonylurea
secretagogues)
g. May become less effective with time, as beta cell func-
tion decreases
2. Biguanides
a. Example: metformin
b. Reduce hepatic glucose production.
c. Average decrease in HgbA1c about 1–2%
d. Associated with weight loss (or at least no weight gain);
hypoglycemia rare
e. Most common side effects are GI (abdominal pain,
nausea, diarrhea).
f. Because of risk of lactic acidosis, contraindicated in
patients with creatinine ≥1.5 mg/dL, decompensated
heart failure (HF), significant hepatic dysfunction,
metabolic acidosis, and alcoholism.
Metformin should be withheld in patients with
acute illness and those undergoing surgery or pro-
cedures using radiocontrast.
g. Has been shown to decrease microvascular and
macrovascular outcomes, and total mortality in obese
type 2 diabetics (UKPDS, 1998)
h. Can be used as monotherapy or in combination with
all other oral agents and insulin
3. α-Glucosidase inhibitors
a. Example: acarbose
b. Delay and decrease intestinal carbohydrate absorption,
decreasing postprandial glucose swings
c. About 50% less efficacious than sulfonylureas and
metformin in reducing HgbA1c
d. Side effects include flatulence, abdominal discomfort,
and diarrhea.
e. No studies of effects on macrovascular or microvascu-
lar outcomes
f. Can be used as monotherapy, but this is rarely done
because of relatively poor efficacy; can also be used in
combination with sulfonylureas
4. Thiazolidinediones (TZDs)
a. Examples: rosiglitazone, pioglitazone
b. Increase insulin-stimulated glucose uptake by skeletal
muscle cells.
c. Average decrease in HgbA1c about 1–2%
d. Tend to increase HDL and decrease triglycerides
e. Can take weeks or months to obtain maximum effect
f. Side effects include weight gain (as great as or more so
than that seen with sulfonylureas) and edema.
g. Increased risk of HF with both agents (RR ~ 3)
h. Increased risk of cardiovascular events with rosiglita-
zone; current data suggest pioglitazone either does not
affect or reduces cardiovascular events
Do not use TZDs in patients with HF or edema.
i. Can be used as monotherapy or in combination with
sulfonylureas, metformin, and insulin.
5. Non-sulfonylurea secretagogues
a. Examples: repaglinide, nateglinide
b. Because of short half-life, cause brief, episodic increases
in insulin secretion
c. Primarily reduce postprandial glucose, with less risk of
hypoglycemia than with sulfonylureas
d. Efficacy of repaglinide similar to that of sulfonylureas
and metformin; nateglinide less efficacious
e. No long-term studies of effects on macrovascular or
microvascular outcomes
f. Must be dosed with every meal
g. Should be used cautiously in patients with hepatic or
renal dysfunction
h. Can be used as monotherapy or in combination with
metformin
6. DPP4 inhibitors
a. Incretins (glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
[GIP] and glucagonlike peptide 1 [GLP-1]) are intes-
tinal peptides that augment insulin secretion in the pres-
ence of glucose or nutrients in the gut; they are inacti-
vated by the enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP4).
b. Sitagliptin and vildagliptin are selective DPP4
inhibitors.
c. Decrease HgbA1c by ~0.75%
d. No GI side effects; average weight gain < 1 kg
e. Less effective than metformin in a direct comparison
f. No data on macrovascular or microvascular outcomes
E. GLP-1 receptor analogues
1. Example: exenatide
2. Given subcutaneously twice daily
3. Decrease HgbA1c by about 1%, similar in efficacy to insulin
4. Most common side effects are nausea and vomiting.
5. Average weight loss of ~1.5 kg when compared with
placebo and of ~4.75 kg when compared with insulin
6. No data on macrovascular or microvascular outcomes
F. Insulin
1. Types of insulin (Table 11–9)
2. Adverse effects of insulin
a. Hypoglycemia, especially with short-acting forms
b. Weight gain of 2–4 kg
G. Choosing a medication to treat type 2 DM
1. Most studies compare an agent to placebo, so direct com-
parison data are limited
194 /  CHAPTER 11
2. Sulfonylureas, metformin, and insulin have the best long-
term outcome data.
3. 75% of patients require more than 1 drug by 9 years; there
is no evidence that any specific combination is better than
another.
4. There is not a standard, evidence-based approach to treat-
ment; the algorithm in Figure 11–1 is consistent with
ADA consensus recommendations.
5. Using insulin to manage type 2 diabetes
a. Beta cell function declines over time in type 2 DM, so
many patients will eventually need insulin.
b. The first step is to add long-acting basal insulin to oral
agents, titrating the insulin dose to the fasting blood sugar.
(1) There are fewer nocturnal hypoglycemic episodes
with bedtime glargine than with bedtime NPH.
(2) There is less weight gain with metformin and
insulin than with sulfonylureas or TZDs and
insulin.
c. If the HgbA1c target is not achieved, options include
adding a short-acting insulin, such as lispro, with
meals, or switching to twice daily biphasic insulin.
d. Sulfonylureas should be stopped when short-acting
insulins are used because of increased hypoglycemia.
Treatment of Hypertension
The treatment goal is to achieve a BP < 130/80 mm Hg. See
Nephropathy section and Hypertension chapter for details.
Treatment of Hypercholesterolemia
A. Statin therapy should be used, regardless of baseline lipid levels,
in diabetic patients with cardiovascular disease, and those
without cardiovascular disease who are over age 40 and have
at least 1 other cardiovascular risk factor.
B. Low-risk patients (those under age 40 or those over age 40
without cardiovascular disease or additional risk factors) do
not require statin therapy if their LDL is < 100 mg/dL.
C. The LDL goal is < 100 mg/dL for patients without known
cardiovascular disease.
D. The LDL goal is < 70 mg/dL for patients with known car-
diovascular disease.
E. Reduction of LDL by 40% is an alternative therapeutic goal
in patients who cannot achieve targets on maximal tolerated
doses of statins.
F. There are no data regarding whether the addition of ezetimibe
to statins reduces cardiovascular outcomes.
G. Although ideally triglycerides are < 150 mg/dL, and HDL is
> 50 mg/dL in women and 40 mg/dL in men, there are no
data regarding whether the addition of a fibrate or niacin to a
statin further reduces cardiovascular outcomes.
Antiplatelet Therapy
A. Low-dose aspirin (75–162 mg/day) prevents vascular events
in diabetics with or without preexisting vascular disease.
B. ADA guidelines recommend low-dose aspirin for the follow-
ing groups:
1. All patients with preexisting vascular disease
2. All type 2 diabetics older than 40 years
3. Type 2 diabetics younger than 40 years who have addi-
tional risk factors such as family history, hypertension,
smoking, dyslipidemia, microalbuminuria
The optimally treated patient with type 2 diabetes
does not smoke, exercises regularly, takes low-dose
aspirin, an ACE inhibitor, and a statin, and has an
HgbA1c < 7.0%, BP < 130/80 mm Hg, and LDL <
100 mg/dL.
Table 11–9. Types of insulin.
Onset of 
Duration of 
Action
Peak 
Action
Rapid Acting
Lispro (Humalog)
5–15 min
45–75 min
2–4 h
Aspart (Novolog)
Short Acting
Regular U100
~30 min
2–4 h
5–8 h
Intermediate Acting
Isophane 
~2 h
4-10 h
10–16 h
(NPH, Humulin N,
Novolin N)
Insulin zinc 
~2 h
4-12 h
12–18 h
(Lente, Humulin L,
Novolin L)
Long Acting
Glargine (Lantus)
~2 h
No peak
20 to > 24 h
Detemir (Levemir)
~2 h
No peak
6–24 h
Premixed
Humulin 70/30 (70% NPH/ 30% regular)
Humalog Mix 75/25 (75% NPL [neutral protamine lispro, similar to
NPH]/25% lispro)
Novalog Mix 70/30 (70% NPH/30% aspart)
DIABETES /  195
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mr. G is a 56-year-old African American man with dia-
betes, chronic hepatitis B, CAD status post MI 2 months
ago, hypertension, and a history of stroke 1 year ago. He
is taking many medications, including Humulin 70/30
20 units twice daily, metoprolol, aspirin, atorvastatin,
lisinopril, furosemide, and ribavirin. Despite all of these
problems, he has been slowly improving and reported at
his last visit 3 weeks ago that he had recently given up
his walker for a cane. Today you are paged by his sister,
who reports that Mr. G is very weak and cannot get up;
his home glucose monitor reading is “critical high.” Mr. G’s
voice is barely recognizable over the phone, and he is
unable to respond to your questions. You advise his sis-
ter to call 911.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
Type 2 DM
diagnosed
HgbA1c < 7.0%
Lifestyle modification;
reassess every
3–4 months
Start metformin
HgbA1c < 7.0% on
maximal tolerated dose of
metformin
HgbA1c <
7.0% on
maximal tolerated doses of
metformin
and sulfonylurea
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Continue metformin,
lifestyle modification;
reassess every
3–6 months
Add
sulfonylurea
No
No
Continue therapy;
reassess every
3–6 months
CVD, cardiovascular disease; DM, diabetes mellitus; HF, heart failure.
PREFERRED
STRATEGY:
Add basal insulin
If the patient refuses insulin, add pioglitazone
(increased risk HF, but possible decrease in CVD)
OR
repaglinide (3 times/day, expensive,
no long-term outcome data, stop sulfonylurea)
OR
exenitide (subcutaneous injection, expensive,
no long-term outcome data)
OR
sitagliptin (expensive, no long-term outcome data)
Figure 11–1. Approach to treatment of type 2 DM.
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis at this point is very broad and difficult
to organize. It is helpful to recognize that Mr. G appears to be
suffering from the syndrome of delirium and to use the frame-
work for delirium to organize your thinking (see Chapter 10,
Delirium and Dementia). It is also reasonable to consider Mr. G’s
underlying chronic medical problems as pivotal points and ini-
tially focus on the serious complications of these conditions; in
other words, initially focus on diseases for which he has a high
pretest probability:
1. Diabetes: DKA, hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS),
infection with or without sepsis.
2. CAD: recurrent MI, possibly with HF or cardiogenic shock
3. Cerebrovascular disease: recurrent stroke
4. Chronic hepatitis B: hepatic encephalopathy
2
Mr. G could have any of these conditions or more than
1 of them. His critical high blood sugar makes a com-
plication of diabetes the leading hypothesis; all of the
other diagnoses are “must not miss” hypotheses
(Table 11–10).
When Mr. G arrives in the emergency department,
he is barely responsive but able to move all 4 extrem-
ities. His BP is 85/50 mm Hg; pulse, 120 bpm; RR, 24
breaths per minute; temperature, 37.2°C. His lungs
are clear, and cardiac exam shows an S4 with no S3
or murmurs. His abdomen is nontender, and there is
no peripheral edema. Initial laboratory tests include
the following:
Sodium, 138 mEq/L; K, 4.9 mEq/L; Cl, 88 mEq/L;
HCO3, 37 mEq/L; BUN, 99 mg/dL; creatinine, 4.3 mg/dL;
glucose, 1246 mg/dL
Arterial blood gases: pH 7.40; PO2, 88 mm Hg; PCO2,
35 mm Hg
WBC is 8400/mcL, with 75% polymorphonuclear neu-
trophils, 3% bands, 18% lymphocytes, and 4% monocytes.
Albumin, 4.4 g/dL; total bilirubin, 0.3 mg/dL; alkaline
phosphatase, 175 units/L; AST (SGOT), 40 units/L; ALT
(SGPT), 56 units/L; INR, 1.1.
Serum ketones, negative
Corrected Na (sodium) = measured Na + (2.4 × glucose −100)
100
= 138 + 2.4(11) = 164
Urinalysis: 2+ protein, 4+ glucose, no ketones, 3–5
WBC/high-power field, occasional bacteria
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Hyperosmolar
Hyperglycemic State
Textbook Presentation
Patients with HHS are usually older type 2 diabetics who present
with the gradual onset of polydipsia, polyuria, and lethargy. They
are extremely dehydrated and have very high serum glucose levels.
Disease Highlights
A. Epidemiology
1. Incidence is 1/1000 person-years (DKA incidence is
4.6–8.0/1000 person years).
2. Mortality rate about 15%
3. Risk factors include older age, nursing home residence,
inability to recognize thirst, and lack of access to fluids.
196 /  CHAPTER 11
Table 11–10. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. G.
Diagnostic 
Important 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Hyperosmolar 
Delirium/coma
Plasma glucose
hyperglycemic 
Polyuria
Serum/urine 
state (HHS)
Polydipsia
ketones
Dehydration
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Diabetic 
Delirium/coma
Blood glucose/ 
ketoacidosis 
Polyuria
bicarbonate
Polydipsia
Serum/urine 
Dehydration
ketones
pH
Sepsis
Hypotension
Blood cultures
Fever
Urinalysis  
Chest radiograph 
Myocardial 
Chest pain
ECG
infarction 
Dyspnea
Cardiac enzymes
Cerebrovascular 
Hemiparesis
Physical exam
accident 
Aphasia
Head CT or MRI
Hepatic 
Delirium
Clinical diagnosis
encephalopathy
Liver disease
Table 11–11. Laboratory findings in HHS and DKA.
Laboratory Parameter
HHS
DKA
Plasma glucose 
> 600
> 300
(mg/dL)
Arterial pH
> 7.30
< 7.3 (< 7.0 in 
severe  DKA)
Serum bicarbonate 
> 15
< 15 (< 10 in 
(mEq/L)
severe  DKA)
Urine ketones
Negative or small
> 3+
Serum ketones
Negative or small
Positive
Anion gap
Variable
> 12
Effective serum
> 320
Variable
osmolality 
(mOsm/L)1
1Effective serum osmolality = 2 × Na (mEq/L)+ glucose (mg/dL)/18
HHS, hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state; DKA, diabetic ketoacidosis.
DIABETES /  197
B. Pathogenesis
1. A reduction in the effective action of circulating insulin and
a concomitant increase in counterregulatory hormones
leads to increased hepatic and renal glucose production and
impaired glucose utilization in peripheral tissues.
2. Glycosuria leads to an osmotic diuresis with loss of free
water in excess of electrolytes, leading to hyperosmolality.
3. As volume depletion occurs, urinary output drops, and
hyperglycemia worsens.
4. The absence of ketoacidosis in HHS is not completely
understood; possible explanations are as follows:
a. There are higher intraportal insulin levels than seen in
DKA, sufficient to prevent lipolysis.
b. The levels of counterregulatory hormones are lower
than in DKA.
c. The hyperosmolar state inhibits lipolysis.
C. Precipitating factors
1. The 3 most common precipitants are infection, lack of
compliance with insulin, and first presentation of diabetes.
2. Other precipitants include postoperative state, cerebrovas-
cular accident (CVA), MI, pancreatitis, alcohol abuse,
trauma, thyrotoxicosis, and medications (eg, corticos-
teroids, total parenteral nutrition).
D. Clinical manifestations
1. History
Complete initial evaluation. Start IV fluids: 1.0 L of 0.9% NaCl per hour initially.
IV Fluids
Hypovolemic
shock
Mild
hypotension
Cardiogenic
shock
Determine hydration status
Insulin
If initial serum K+ is < 3.3
mEq/L, hold insulin and
give 40 mEq K+ (2/3 as
KCI and 1/3 KPO4) until
K+ ≥ 3.3 mEq/L
Regular, 0.15 units/kg as
IV bolus
0.1 units · kg–1 · h–1 IV
insulin infusion
Check serum glucose hourly.
If serum glucose does not fall
by at least 50 mg/dL in
first hour, then double insulin
dose hourly until glucose falls
at a steady hourly rate of
50–70 mg/dL
Check electrolytes, BUN, creatinine and glucose every 2–4 h until
stable. After resolution of HHS, if the patient is NPO, continue IV
insulin and supplement with SQ regular insulin as needed. When the
patient can eat, initiate SQ insulin or previous treatment regimen and
assess metabolic control. Continue to look for precipitating cause(s).
Change to 5% dextrose with 0.45% NaCl and
decrease insulin to 0.05–0.1 units · kg–1 · h–1 to maintain
serum glucose between 250–300 mg/dL until
plasma osmolality is ≤ 315 mOsm/kg and patient
is mentally alert.
If initial serum K+ ≥ 5.0
mEq/L, do not give K+ but
check potassium every 2 h
If initial serum K+ ≥ 3.3
but < 5.0 mEq/L, give
20–30 mEq K+ in each liter
of IV fluid (2/3 as KCL
and 1/3 as KPO4) to
keep serum K+ at 4–5 mEq/L
Potassium
Administer 0.9%
NaCl (1.0 L/h)
and/or plasma
expanders
Hemodynamic
monitoring
Serum Na
high
When serum glucose reaches 300 mg/dL
Serum Na
normal
Serum Na
low
Evaluate corrected serum Na
0.45% NaCl (4–14 mL ·
kg–1 · h–1) depending
on state of hydration
0.9% NaCl (4–14 mL ·
kg–1 · h–1) depending
on state of hydration
Figure 11–2. Management of adult patients with hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS). (Reproduced, with permission, from
American Diabetes Association, Diabetes Care. 2004;27:S94–S102.)
198 /  CHAPTER 11
a. Symptoms and signs usually evolve over several days or
even weeks.
b. Common findings include polyuria, polydipsia,
fatigue, and weight loss.
c. Abdominal pain generally does not occur in HHS, as it
does in DKA, but there are reports of a hypertonicity-
induced gastroparesis leading to abdominal pain, dis-
tention, nausea, and vomiting.
d. Neurologic manifestations
(1) Lethargy and disorientation common
(2) Focal neurologic findings, including seizures, can
occur with hyperglycemia and resolve with nor-
malization of serum glucose.
(3) Changes in mental status correlate with the degree
of hyperosmolarity.
(a) 20–25% present with coma.
(b) Coma present in half of patients with effective
serum osmolality of > 350 mOsm/L
(c) Must search for another cause of coma if
osmolality < 345–350 mOsm/L
2. Physical exam
a. Hypothermia often seen resulting from peripheral
vasodilation
b. Signs of dehydration (see Chapter 25, Acute Renal
Failure) often seen
c. Tachycardia and hypotension suggest severe dehydra-
tion or underlying sepsis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Typical total body water deficit is 20–25% (about 9 L).
B. See Table 11–11 for laboratory findings in HHS compared
with DKA.
Treatment 
A. Patients with HHS generally need more fluid and less insulin
than those with DKA
B. Figure 11–2 outlines the treatment approach.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mr. G’s glucose is > 600 mg/dL, ketones are negative,
and calculated serum osmolality is 345 mOsm/L (effec-
tive serum osmolality = 2 × measured Na + glucose/18 =
(2 × 138) + 1246/18 = 345).
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for the
leading hypothesis, HHS? Have you ruled out the
active alternatives? Do other tests need to be
done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Mr. G fulfills the diagnostic criteria for HHS. It is not necessary
to consider other diagnoses, but it is essential to determine the
precipitant for this event. Considering Mr. G’s complicated
history, he is at risk for many of the precipitants of HHS, espe-
cially infection, MI, and CVA.
Always look for the precipitant when patients pres-
ent with either HHS or DKA.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mr. G’s chest radiograph is clear, his urine and blood cul-
tures are negative, his ECG shows no acute changes, and
his cardiac enzymes are normal. He responds well to IV
hydration and insulin therapy. When he becomes more
alert, he reports that he had become depressed and had
stopped taking his insulin.
REFERENCES
American Diabetes Association. Diagnosis and classification of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes Care. 2008;31:s55–s60.
American Diabetes Association. Hyperglycemic crises in patients with diabetes
mellitus. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:S94–S102.
American Diabetes Association. Standard of medical care in diabetes—2008. Dia-
betes Care. 2008;31:S12–s54.
Bax JJ, Young LH, Frye RL et al. Screening for coronary artery disease in patients
with diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:2729–36.
Bolen S, Feldman L, Vassy J et al. Systematic review: comparative effectiveness and
safety of oral medications for type 2 diabetes mellitus. Ann Intern Med.
2007;147:386–99.
Boulton AJM, Vinik AI, Arezzo JC et al. Diabetic neuropathies. Diabetes Care.
2005;28:956–62.
Butalia S, Palda VA, Sargeant RJ et al. Does this patient with diabetes have
osteomyelitis of the lower extremity? JAMA. 2008;299:806–13.
England JD, Gronseth GS, Franklin G et al. Distal symmetric polyneuropathy: a
definition for clinical research. Neurology. 2005;64:199–207.
Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel A et al. 10-year follow up of intensive glucose con-
trol in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1577–89.
Kapoor A, Page S, LaValley M et al. Magnetic resonance imaging for diagnosing
foot osteomyelitis. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:125–32.
Mohamed Q, Gillies MC, Wong TY. Management of diabetic retinopathy: a sys-
tematic review. JAMA. 2007;298:902–16.
Nathan DM, Buse JB, Davidson, MB et al. Medical management of hyperglycemia
in type 2 diabetes: a consensus algorithm for the initiation and adjustment
of therapy. Diabetes Care. 2008;31:1–11.  
Perkins BA, Olaleye D, Zinman B, Bril V. Simple screening tests for peripheral
neuropathy in the diabetes clinic. Diabetes Care. 2001;24:250–56.
Saudek CD, Derr RL, Kalyani RR. Assessing glycemia in diabetes using self-
monitoring blood glucose and hemoglobin A1c. JAMA. 2006;295:1688–97.
The Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes Study Group. Effects of
intensive glucose lowering in type 2 DM. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:
2545–59.
The ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood glucose control and vascu-
lar outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med.
2008;358:2560–72.
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. The effect of
intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-
term complication in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med.
1993;329:977–86.
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose control
with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment and
risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes. (UKPDS 34) UK
Prospective Diabetes Study Group. Lancet. 1998;352:837–53.
?
12
199
CHIEF COMPLAINT  
PATIENT 
1
Mr. C is a 35-year-old man who comes to your outpatient
office complaining of 1 day of diarrhea.
What is the differential diagnosis of diar-
rhea? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Although the presence of diarrhea is actually defined by stool
weight, it is more useful to define acute diarrhea clinically. Diarrhea
can be thought of as bowel movements of a looser consistency than
usual that occur more than 3 times a day. Acute diarrhea develops
over a period of 1–2 days and lasts for less than 4 weeks. (This
chapter will not address chronic or intermittent diarrhea.) The dif-
ferential diagnosis below uses the pivotal point of presenting symp-
toms to organize diagnoses into three categories: noninfectious,
gastroenteritis, and infectious colitis. This structure is easy to
remember, focuses history taking, allows prognosticating, and is
also a good framework on which to consider therapy See Fig. 12–1.
Noninfectious diarrhea is recognized by the lack of constitu-
tional symptoms. Infectious diarrhea that presents with large vol-
ume (often watery) stool, constitutional symptoms, nausea and
vomiting, and often abdominal cramps can be categorized as gas-
troenteritis. Infectious colitis presents with fever, tenesmus, and
dysentery (stools with blood and mucus). Many organisms can
cause both gastroenteritis and inflammatory diarrhea.
A. Noninfectious diarrhea
1. Medications and other ingestible substances (some with
osmotic effect)
a. Sorbitol (gum, mints, pill fillers)
b. Mannitol
c. Fructose (fruits, soft drinks)
d. Fiber (bran, fruits, vegetables)
e. Lactulose
2. Magnesium-containing medications
a. Nutritional supplements
b. Antacids
c. Laxatives
3. Malabsorption
a. Lactose intolerance
b. Pancreatitis
4. Medications causing diarrhea through nonosmotic means
a. Metformin
b. Antibiotics
c. Colchicine
d. Digoxin
e. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressants
B. Infectious diarrhea: gastroenteritis
1. Viral (most common)
a. Caliciviruses (Norovirus, formally Norwalk virus)
b. Rotovirus 
2. Bacterial (commonly food-borne)
a. Vibrio cholera
b. Escherichia coli
c. Shigella species
d. Salmonella species
e. Campylobacter species
f. Yersinia enterocolitica
3. Toxin-mediated
a. Staphylococcus aureus
b. Clostridium perfringens
c. Bacillus cereus
d. E coli
C. Infectious diarrhea: inflammatory colitis
1. Bacterial
a. Shigella species
b. E coli
c. Campylobacter species
d. Salmonella species
e. Y enterocolitica
2. Antibiotic-associated
a. Clostridium difficile
b. Klebsiella oxytoca
c. Non-C difficile–related
1
The first symptom the patient noted was a poor
appetite while eating breakfast. He was unable to finish
his usual cup of coffee and a bowl of cereal. During his
20-minute drive to work he developed nausea and 
(Continued)
I have a patient with acute diarrhea.
How do I determine the cause?
diaphoresis. Upon arriving at work he developed low-grade
fever, abdominal cramping, and vomiting. Over the next 12
hours, diarrhea developed. He describes the stool being
watery and brown without any blood.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. C seeks medical attention within about 24 hours of the onset
of diarrhea. The pivotal points in his history are acute onset of
symptoms over about 60 minutes, early predominance of nausea,
and watery brown stool. This presentation certainly speaks for an
infectious cause. The low-grade fever and absence of dysentery
make it likely that the diagnosis is in the category of gastroenteri-
tis. Table 12–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
Mr. C is otherwise in good health. He reports no recent ill-
nesses or antibiotic exposures. There have been no recent
changes in his diet, and he has eaten only food prepared
at home for the last week. He lives with his wife and
reports no known sick contacts. He works as a bus driver. 
He has not traveled from New York City, where he lives and
works.
The physical exam is notable for temperature, 38.2°C;
BP is 110/80 mm Hg and pulse is 100 bpm while lying
down; BP is 90/72 mm Hg and pulse is 126 bpm while
standing; RR, 12 breaths per minute. Sclera and conjunc-
tiva are normal. The abdomen is soft and diffusely tender
with hyperactive bowel sounds. The rectal exam shows
brown, heme-negative stool.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Norovirus
Textbook Presentation
Acute vomiting is usually the presenting symptom. Mild diarrhea
begins after the vomiting. Mild abdominal cramping is common.
Low-grade fever and dehydration are usually present. All symp-
toms resolve completely by 3 days.
Disease Highlights
A. Calciviruses, of which Norovirus and closely related viruses
such as Sapovirus are the most common, account for about
80% of adult nonbacterial gastroenteritis.
B. Most commonly occurs in winter.
C. Transmission may be person-to-person or may be food-borne.
Norovirus is the most common cause of food-borne infection.
D. High attack rate (up to 50% of exposed individuals)
E. Incubation period is 1–2 days.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. There are no diagnostic tests available for routine clinical use.
B. Diagnosis is made by clinical presentation.
Treatment
A. Supportive care
1. Most patients with acute diarrhea require only supportive
care. Supportive care is meant to provide rehydration and
symptom relief.
2. Rehydration
a. Oral rehydration is the most important means of rehy-
dration. 
b. For patients with mild diarrhea and little volume
depletion, any oral fluids (such as the commonly pre-
scribed Gatorade, pedialyte, chicken soup) are appro-
priate rehydration.
c. For patients with more significant volume depletion,
oral rehydration solutions should contain NaCl, KCl,
HCO3 or citrate, and glucose. The World Health
Organization oral rehydration solution has the follow-
ing composition:
(1) Sodium: 75 mmol/L
(2) Chloride: 65 mmol/L
200 /  CHAPTER 12
Table 12–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Norovirus virus
Hyperacute onset
Resolution in
Vomiting usually 
24–48 hours
present
Active Alternative
Toxin-mediated
Common food 
Rapid resolution,
gastroenteritis,
poisoning
within 12 hours
such as
Onset 1–8 hours 
Staphylococcus
after exposure 
aureus
Vomiting is 
predominant
Bacterial
Usually food-borne
Stool cultures can 
gastroenteritis,
Fairly specific clinical 
be diagnostic
such as Salmonella
syndromes
infection
High fevers possible
Other Alternative
Rotavirus
Contact with children
Resolution in
Vomiting common
24–72 hours
and constitutional
signs present
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  201
(3) Glucose: 75 mmol/L
(4) Potassium: 20 mmol/L
(5) Citrate: 10 mmol/L
d. If this solution is not available, patients can be
instructed to mix the following in 1 L of water
(1) One-half teaspoon of salt
(2) One-quarter teaspoon of baking soda
(3) 8 teaspoons of sugar
e. IV fluids (lactated Ringer solution or normal saline)
are reasonable until the patient can take fluid orally.
3. Antidiarrheals (such as loperamide) are safe and effective
for patients without dysentery. Using antidiarrheals in a
patient with dysentery is not safe because they can:
a. Cause prolonged fever
b. Cause toxic megacolon and perforation
c. Possibly increase the risk of hemolytic uremic syn-
drome (HUS) in patients with Shiga toxin–producing
E coli (STEC). 
Antidiarrheals are very effective for control of
symptoms. They should never be used for patients
with dysentery or signs of invasive infection (tenes-
mus, blood or mucus in stool, high fever, and severe
abdominal pain).
4. Antiemetics
5. Diet
a. BRAT diet (banana, rice, applesauce, toast) is often
recommended.
b. Avoid dairy products (see below).
B. Antimicrobial therapy
1. Treatment other than supportive care is not necessary for
Norovirus-like illnesses.
2. Empiric antimicrobial therapy is recommended for diar-
rheal infections only in limited circumstances. These cir-
cumstances never occur in patients with noninfectious
diarrhea and almost never in patients with gastroenteritis.
Specific circumstances are discussed throughout the chap-
ter; general circumstances include the following:
a. Severe disease (profuse diarrhea with hypovolemia)
b. High fever
c. Severe abdominal pain
d. Dysentery
e. High band count
Empiric antimicrobial therapy for diarrhea is rea-
sonable for patients with severe symptoms.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
At the time of the patient’s visit he was feeling better
than he had previously. He still noted an “upset stomach” 
and was having soft watery diarrhea every 2–3 hours. He
had not had any vomiting in about 6 hours and was
therefore able to keep down fluids.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, Norovirus? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
Unlike most clinical situations an exact diagnosis in a patient with
diarrhea often need not be made. The clinical syndrome in Mr. C
is consistent with viral gastroenteritis. By recognizing this syn-
drome, you are able to reassure him that he should be better in the
next 24–48 hours. Even if a diagnostic test for Norovirus were
available for routine use in clinical practice, the usefulness would
be low because treatment is only supportive.
Most evaluations for diarrhea are negative. Most studies report
positive cultures in at most 5% of patients. Ova and parasite tests
are even less likely to be positive.
In most patients with an acute diarrheal illness,
diagnostic testing is not helpful to the patient but
may be important from a public health standpoint.
Alternative Diagnosis:Toxin-Mediated
Gastroenteritis 
Textbook Presentation
The presentation of this syndrome, most commonly caused by
Staphylococcus aureus or C perfringens, is usually acute, with vom-
iting and crampy abdominal pain. Vomiting is the predominant
symptom with diarrhea being mild and watery and fever being low
grade. Because of the very short lag between ingestion and illness
(2–8 hours), the culpable meal is usually the last one eaten. Recov-
ery is very rapid (12–48 hours). 
Disease Highlights
A. Toxin-mediated gastroenteritis caused by S aureus, C perfrin-
gens, or B cereus is essentially always food-borne. These organ-
isms are not the most common causes of food-borne infec-
tion, in fact, they may account for only 1% of food-borne
infections.
B. Viral causes probably account for about 60% of all food-
borne infections. Salmonella, Campylobacter, Shigella, and
Cryptosporidium are the most common bacterial and parasitic
causes of food-borne infections according to the most recent
data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) (Table 12–2).
C. S aureus, C perfringens, and B cereus can often be recognized
through the clinical and exposure history.
1. This recognition can enable the physician to provide prog-
nosis, avoid unnecessary testing, and prevent further infec-
tion from a common source.
2. Table 12–3 describes the clinical syndromes of these
infections.
202 /  CHAPTER 12
Illnesses presenting with the acute onset of vomiting
and constitutional symptoms, often with abdominal
cramping, are usually caused by viruses or bacteria
that elaborate toxins.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. There are no diagnostic tests available for routine clinical use.
B. Diagnosis is by clinical presentation, and these infections
should be considered in any patient with acute gastrointesti-
nal symptoms and recent, suspect food intake.
Treatment
Treatment is supportive care and outlined above.
Alternative Diagnosis: Gastroenteritis caused
by Salmonella Species
Textbook Presentation
The onset of disease is usually subacute with nausea, fever, and
diarrhea. Fever and nausea often resolve over 1–2 days while diar-
rhea persists for 5–7 days. Patients usually have watery diarrhea
with 6–8 bowel movements each day. Dysentery is possible. Bac-
teria commonly remain in the stool for 4–5 weeks. Salmonella gas-
troenteritis may cause higher fevers than viral or preformed toxin
disease.
Disease Highlights
A. Salmonella species cause 3 major types of disease.
1. Diarrheal illnesses
a. Gastroenteritis
b. Dysentery (discussed later in the chapter)
2. Bacteremia with the potential for focal infectious compli-
cation.
a. Usually a secondary complication of gastroenteritis
b. Bacteremia develops in ~5% of patients, and focal infec-
tions develop in a small percentage of these patients.
3. Typhoid fever
a. A systemic illness characterized by fever and abdominal
pain caused by Salmonella typhi
b. Typhoid fever is distinct from gastroenteritis, which is
caused by non-typhi Salmonella species.
c. Although not generally considered a diarrheal illness,
some patients may have diarrhea as a predominant
symptom.
d. Although typhoid fever is a major problem worldwide,
it is seen predominantly in the United States in unvac-
cinated travelers.
e. Should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a
traveler with a febrile illness.
B. Gastroenteritis is the most common Salmonella-related dis-
ease in the United States. The incidence of Salmonella diar-
rhea in 2006 was 14.8 cases/100,000 persons.
C. Salmonella is transmitted by:
1. Food
a. Eggs and poultry are most common sources.
b. There are reports of infection from almost any type of
food.
2. Fecal-oral contact with infected patients
a. Person-to-person transmission is less common than
infection from contaminated food.
b. Patients shed bacteria for weeks after infection.
3. Animals also carry salmonella (reptiles most classically).
Table 12–2. Bacterial causes of food-borne illness.
% Infections with a 
Approximate %
Given Organism 
Total Food-Borne
That Are
Organism
Infections, 2006
Food-Borne
Salmonella
38
95
Campylobacter
33
80
Shigella
16
20
Cryptosporidium
5
10
STEC
5
85
Yersinia 
1
90
Vibrio
1
65
Listeria
1
99
STEC, Shigella toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
Table 12–3. Clinical syndromes of toxin-mediated gastroenteritis.
Organism
Pathogenesis
Incubation
Source 
Clinical Syndrome
Staphylococcus
Preformed toxin
1–6 hours
Protein rich food
Acute onset
aureus
Vomiting predominant
Resolves within 2 hours
Clostridium
Elaborated toxin
8–16 hours
Meats
Diarrhea with 
perfringens
abdominal cramping
Lasts 1–2 days
Bacillus cereus
Preformed toxin
1–6 hours
Grains
Very similar to S aureus 
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  203
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The gold standard for diagnosis of salmonella gastroenteritis
remains stool culture results. There are tests with greater sen-
sitivity, but none are used in routine clinical practice.
B. The details of the decision-making regarding use of stool cul-
tures are covered in case 2. 
Treatment
A. Prevention: Because salmonella is heat sensitive, cooking food
well and good hand washing practices prevent most infec-
tions.
B. Treatment
1. Most salmonella infections require no treatment.
2. The patients who should receive therapy beyond support-
ive care are those who have
a. Severe disease (dehydration, dysentery, high fever)
b. Immunocompromised status, probably including the
very elderly
c. Elevated risk of focal infection
(1) Bacteremia
(2) Prosthetic joints or hardware
(3) Sickle cell anemia
d. Typhoid fever
3. Although most patients shed bacteria for weeks after infec-
tion, antibiotics should not be used in attempts to prevent
transmission. Antibiotics do not shorten the duration of
carriage and may prolong it.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mr. C was sent home with directions for oral rehydration.
He reported sleeping for most of the afternoon and was
well enough to return to work the next day. By the follow-
ing day (day 4 of the presentation), the patient was
completely better. He reported that none of his close
contacts became ill.
The patient’s symptoms lasted 48–72 hours. He required no spe-
cific therapy. There were no suspicious food exposures and nobody
else became ill. The case is consistent with a viral gastroenteritis
such as Norovirus. The lack of a suspicious diet history makes a
toxin-induced food-borne illness less likely. 
FOLLOW-UP OF MR. C
1
Two weeks later Mr. C comes to see you again. He attrib-
utes his recovery to antibiotics that he took on the day
he saw you. (The antibiotics were left over from a pre-
scription he had not completed for a dental infection).
About 5 days after his recovery, he began to feel poorly
again. For the last 10 days he has had diarrhea, 
abdominal bloating, and belching. He denies fever, chills,
nausea, vomiting, or tenesmus. There has been no blood
in his stool.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
There are three pivotal points in this presentation:
1. The patient has recently experienced what was almost certainly
an infectious GI illness.
2. The patient has recently taken antibiotics.
3. The patient’s symptoms have been present for 10 days. 
Ten days is prolonged when considering acute infectious diarrhea so
other diagnoses should be considered. These include a noninfec-
tious cause, a recurrent gastroenteritis, or an antibiotic-associated
diarrhea. The recent gastroenteritis should raise the possibility of
lactose intolerance. Lactose intolerance is common after gastroen-
teritis due to injury to the small bowel mucosa. Another possibility
would be recurrent infectious gastroenteritis, which can occur since
many of the bacteria that cause diarrhea can persist in the stool after
clinical symptoms have resolved. This prolonged bacterial shedding
also accounts for spread of the illness. This is especially common
with Salmonella and Campylobacter. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea is
a common entity, complicating between 2% and 25% of courses of
antibiotics. The level of risk varies with the specific antibiotic. The
prolonged nature of the illness should prompt consideration of the
less typical pathogens, such as parasites; could our initial diagnosis
have been incorrect? Table 12–4 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
The patient describes 3–4 soft bowel movements a day.
He also notes a fair amount of abdominal discomfort.
There is no real pain, but there is bloating and belching.
He says he goes to the bathroom 3 or 4 additional times
each day just to pass gas.
The patient took 3 doses of amoxicillin on the day he
first came to see you. He ran out after these 3 doses. He
has not traveled since his infection and does not note
any unusual exposures. He reports that his diet has been
a little more simple than usual with a lot of cereal, rice,
potatoes, and milk to “soothe his stomach.”
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Lactose Intolerance
Textbook Presentation
Lactose intolerance most commonly presents as chronic symp-
toms in a person of susceptible ethnic background. The symptoms
204 /  CHAPTER 12
may be subacute or acute in the setting of infection or dietary
changes. The predominant symptom may be belching, bloating,
flatulence, diarrhea, or abdominal pain. A suspicious dietary his-
tory should be present.
Disease Highlights
A. Lactose intolerance is very common.
B. Predictable by ethnic background, worsens with age
C. Episodes of small bowel infection can cause transient lactose
intolerance in anyone but are more apt to cause symptoms in
people with low levels of lactase activity at baseline.
D. Ethnic groups and native populations most likely to have low
levels of lactase activity come from the following regions:
1. Middle East and Mediterranean
2. East Asia
3. Africa
4. Native American
E. Milk, ice cream, and yogurt have the highest levels of lactose.
F. Foods with high lactose and low fat (skim milk) tend to cause
the most symptoms as these foods deliver lactose to the small
intestine the fastest.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of lactose intolerance is generally a clinical one
based on a suspicious history in a patient with a susceptible
background whose symptoms resolve on a lactose-free diet. 
B. More definitive tests, the lactose tolerance test or lactose
breath hydrogen test, can be performed in patients in whom
the diagnosis is likely but not clear historically.
C. Because of the high prevalence of mild lactose intolerance and
the frequent exacerbation following gastroenteritis, patients
with acute gastroenteritis should be advised to avoid dairy
products for 2 weeks after recovery.
Treatment
A. In general, lactose intolerance is treated by decreasing lactose
intake.
B. Because people have variable levels of lactase activity, levels of
tolerance differ from person to person.
C. Enzyme supplements, available over the counter, are often
helpful.
D. In acquired illness (eg, post gastroenteritis), lactase levels will
eventually recover when the intestinal brush border regener-
ates.
E. It is usually reasonable to suggest waiting 2 weeks before rein-
troducing lactose-containing products.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
On exam he appears well. Vital signs are all normal. His
abdominal exam reveals hyperactive bowel sounds with
minimal distention. It is soft and nontender. Rectal exam
reveals soft, brown, heme-negative stool.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, lactose intolerance?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
The patient does not appear to have an infectious cause of his diarrhea—
at least not a bacterial or viral cause. This fact makes recurrence of
his previous infection very unlikely. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea
or diarrhea caused by a parasitic infection are still possible.
Alternative Diagnosis: Antibiotic-Associated
Diarrhea
Textbook Presentation
Patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhea usually have symp-
toms of gastroenteritis or dysentery during antibiotic therapy.
Upper abdominal symptoms of nausea and vomiting are rare.
Disease Highlights
A. There are really 2 distinct types of antibiotic-associated diar-
rhea: diarrhea related to an enteric pathogen (primarily C dif-
ficile) and diarrhea related to other effects of antibiotics. 
B. The antibiotics most commonly responsible for both types of
diarrhea are:
1. Clindamycin
2. Cephalosporins
3. Ampicillin, amoxicillin, and amoxicillin-clavulanate
Table 12–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C’s repeat visit.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Lactose
Ethnic 
Resolution with
intolerance
predisposition
dietary changes
Recent illness
Relation to diet
Active Alternative
Antibiotic-
Only caused by 
Usually resolves with
associated
Clostridium difficile
discontinuation of
diarrhea
about 15–20%
antibiotic
of time
Specific tests for
C difficile toxin
Recurrent infection
Similar symptoms
Stool cultures
as initial illness
Most common with
bacterial pathogen
Other Alternative
Parasitic infection
Exposure history
Stool ova and 
common
parasites may be 
(often with travel) 
diagnostic
Consider especially in
immunosuppressed
patients
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  205
C. C difficile
1. Accounts for 10–20% of antibiotic-associated diarrhea 
2. C difficile causes diarrhea via toxin-mediated effects on the
large bowel. This can present as severe diarrhea, often with
symptoms of colonic inflammation and a high WBC count.
3. Risk factors for C difficile include advanced age, hospital-
ization, and exposure to antibiotics. 
4. C difficile has been reported up to 6 months after a course
of antibiotics.
5. There are recent reports of a greater incidence of commu-
nity-acquired C difficile and C difficile related to the use of
proton pump inhibitors.
6. Recent reports also speak to the increasing severity of C
difficile related to change in the genetics dictating toxin
production.
D. K oxytoca
1. Newly recognized cytotoxin-producing bacteria capable of
causing antibiotic-associated hemorrhagic colitis.
2. Much less common than C difficile.
E. Patients with antibiotic-associated diarrhea not related to C
difficile usually have mild disease that occurs either during or
immediately after a course of antibiotics. Possible causes of
this type of diarrhea are numerous:
1. Change in intestinal flora
2. Nonantimicrobial effect of antibiotics such as the pro-
motility effects of erythromycin
3. Enteric infections other than C difficile
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Certain features make the diagnosis of antibiotic-associated
diarrhea not associated with C difficile likely.
1. History of previous antibiotic-associated diarrhea not
associated with C difficile.
2. Mild to moderate symptoms
3. Negative work up for C difficile.
B. C difficile colitis
1. Diagnosed by identification of either the toxin in the stool
or by demonstration of the classic pseudomembranous
colitis on sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy.
2. Culture, although highly sensitive and specific, is used less
because there are nontoxin-producing strains of C difficile
that are not clinically important.
3. The test characteristics of the toxin assay are listed below.
Because of the lower sensitivity, 3 samples are recom-
mended.
a. Sensitivity, 70–95%; specificity, 95–99%
b. LR+, 14–95; LR−, 0.05–0.32
C. If a clinical syndrome consistent with C difficile colitis persists
despite negative toxin assay, sigmoidoscopic exam of the
colon is recommended. If symptoms do not resolve and eval-
uation for C difficile is negative, stool cultures to rule out
another antibiotic-associated enteric infection are reasonable.
Treatment
A. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea not related to C difficile infec-
tion usually resolves with discontinuation of antibiotics.
Other useful treatments include:
1. Probiotic agents such as yogurt
2. Antidiarrheals
B. The treatment of C difficile is as follows:
1. First-line treatment is oral metronidazole; second-line
treatment is oral vancomycin.
2. Avoid antidiarrheals
3. Relapse complicates 20–25% of cases of treated C difficile.
Alternative Diagnosis: Giardia lamblia
Textbook Presentation
Giardiasis can present as either acute or chronic diarrhea. It usu-
ally occurs in patients with exposure to infected water supplies,
although person-to-person transmission can occur. Symptoms
usually include diarrhea, nausea, abdominal cramps, bloating, flat-
ulence, and foul-smelling stools.
Disease Highlights
A. Giardia is the most common cause of parasitic diarrhea in the
United States.
B. Most infections in the United States result from ingestion of
contaminated water (from streams and lakes).
C. Cases most commonly occur in children age 1–9 or adults
age 30–39.
D. Incidence peaks annually during the summer and early fall
when people most commonly participate in water sports and
camping.
E. Although usually sporadic, there are occasional outbreaks
related to contamination of bodies of water used for recre-
ation and drinking supplies.
F. Common symptoms
1. Diarrhea occurs in 96% of cases.
2. Weight loss is present in 62% of cases.
3. Abdominal cramps occur in 61% of cases.
4. Greasy stools are present in 57% of cases.
5. Belching, flatulence, and foul-smelling stools are com-
monly reported.
G. Fever is uncommon.
H. Chronic infection occurs in about 10% of untreated patients.
I. If evaluation for Giardia is negative and there is no
response to empiric therapy, other organisms should also be
considered.
1. This is especially true in patients who are immunocom-
promised.
2. Other organisms commonly seen are:
a. Cryptosporidium
b. Cyclospora cayetanensis
c. Isospora belli
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. G lamblia
1. Sensitivity of stool ova and parasites for Giardia is
50–70% for 1 stool sample.
2. Sensitivity is over 90% for 3 samples.
3. Antigen assays sensitive to over 90%.
206 /  CHAPTER 12
B. Other organisms
1. Cryptosporidium can be identified on stool antigen assay.
2. C cayetanensis and I belli can be identified on acid-fast
stain.
Treatment
A. The treatment of choice for G lamblia infection is oral
metronidazole. 
B. Empiric therapy is often recommended. 
CASE RESOLUTION
1
A lactose-free diet was recommended for the patient. Three
stool samples were tested for C difficile toxin; results were
negative. The suspicion for a recurrent bacterial infection or
a parasitic infection was very low.
The patient began a lactose-free diet and was better
within 3 days. After 2 weeks, he slowly reintroduced his
usual diet without symptoms.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Ms. V is a 45-year-old woman who comes to see you in
the office; she complains of 4 days of diarrhea. She
reports feeling tired and weak. She is moving her bowels
about 6–8 times a day. She says that she has signifi-
cant abdominal pain. She came in today because she has
begun to pass bloody stools.
On physical exam, her vital signs are temperature,
38.3°C; BP, 130/84 mm Hg; pulse, 90 bpm; RR, 12 breaths
per minute. She is orthostatic.
Her abdomen has hyperactive bowel sounds. It is dif-
fusely tender, without peritoneal signs. Her stool is a mix-
ture of soft brown stool and blood.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS
The pivotal points in this case are the presence of bloody
stools, abdominal pain, and fever. This symptom complex
makes diarrhea caused by a bacterial infection likely. The
organisms that commonly cause bloody diarrhea are Shigella
species, Campylobacter species, and E coli. Salmonella species, Y
enterocolitica, and C difficile also may cause bloody diarrhea.
Noninfectious causes, such as ischemia or ulcerative colitis,
should also be considered. 
It is impossible to clinically differentiate between the bacterial
diarrheas. That said, it is important to know organisms’ recogniz-
able symptom complexes because these can give clues to the
causative organism. Because treatment decisions are often made
before the specific organism is identified by culture, these clues
can help guide appropriate therapy. Table 12–5 lists the differen-
tial diagnosis.
2
The patient’s first symptoms, 4 days ago, were fever and
lethargy. She felt terrible for the entire day and thought she
was getting the flu. The following day, she began to have diar-
rhea and diffuse abdominal pain. Two days later, the day she
comes to your office, she began to have blood in her stool.
She reports that her husband is also sick with similar
symptoms. His diarrhea developed the day before hers
did but he has not noticed blood in his stool. He refused
to come in because he figured it was “just a virus.”
Table 12–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms.V.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Bacterial diarrhea
Constitutional 
Stool culture
caused by
prodrome
Campylobacter
Diarrhea with 
infection
significant 
abdominal pain
Occasional dysentery 
Active Alternative
Bacterial diarrhea,
Varies by species 
Stool culture
caused by infection
but classically 
High bandemia 
with Shigella species 
colonic predominant
common
symptoms—dysentery
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Bacterial diarrhea,
Diarrhea, usually 
Stool culture for 
caused by infection 
bloody
organism must be
with Shiga
Fever uncommon
specifically 
toxin–producing
Right-sided 
requested 
Escherichia coli 0157
abdominal pain
Toxin can be 
identified
Other Alternative
Ulcerative colitis
Usually subacute
Endoscopic
to chronic
diagnosis
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  207
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Campylobacter Infection
Textbook Presentation
Presenting symptoms of Campylobacter infection are usually diar-
rhea and abdominal pain. The diarrhea is often profuse and watery
and the pain can be severe, often mimicking appendicitis or other
abdominal disease that may require surgery. The fever usually
resolves over the first 2 days of the illness, while the diarrhea and
abdominal pain may last 4–6 days.
Disease Highlights
A. Campylobacter species are among the most commonly isolated
pathogens in patients with diarrhea and are a common cause
of bloody stool.
B. The incidence of Campylobacter diarrhea in 2006 was 12.7 cases/
100,000 persons.
C. In 1 recent study of patients arriving at emergency depart-
ments with bloody diarrhea, the breakdown of diagnoses
were:
1. Shigella in 15.3% of patients
2. Campylobacter in 6.2% of patients
3. Salmonella in 5.2% of patients
4. Shiga toxin–producing E coli in 2.6% of patients
5. Other cause in 1.6% of patients
D. Common aspects of the presentation are
1. Constitutional symptoms before GI disease
2. Bloody diarrhea beginning after 2–3 days of watery diarrhea
E. There can be rare late complications.
1. Reactive arthritis
2. Guillain-Barré
F. Bacteria commonly remain in the stool for 4–5 weeks and
reinfection might occur.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Although stool cultures are most likely to be negative (even in
patients with bloody diarrhea), they can be useful in some cir-
cumstances.
1. Campylobacter and Shigella infections clearly benefit from
treatment.
2. Inappropriate treatment of salmonella (treating mild or
moderate non-typhi infection) is not helpful and may lead
to prolonged carriage.
3. Culture results can be very useful from a public health
standpoint.
B. Stool cultures are really the only way to distinguish organisms.
1. A representative study that looked at the clinical charac-
teristics of patients with diagnostic stool cultures showed
the overlap of the clinical syndromes.
2. Table 12–6 lists the percentage of patients with various
characteristics by organism.
C. The decision making regarding whether to send stool cultures
mirrors that for treatment discussed above. In order to increase
the yield of the cultures (both in terms of positive results and
clinical usefulness), consider the following questions:
1. Is there a clinical suspicion for a specific disease that
requires treatment?
a. Severely ill patient (fever, dysentery, abdominal pain);
about 30% of patients with dysentery have positive
cultures (compared with 1–6% of all patients).
b. Suspicious exposure (travel, high-risk sexual behavior,
antibiotics)
Table 12–6. Percentages of patients with various clinical characteristic by organism.
Organism
Characteristic
Shigella 
Campylobacter
Salmonella
E coli
Bloody diarrhea
54.3%
37.0%
33.8%
91.3%
Abdominal pain
77.9%
79.5%
69.7%
90.5%
Abdominal tenderness
33.5%
45.4%
28.8%
72.0%
Subjective fever
78.6%
58.7%
72.0%
35.0%
Objective fever
69.4%
50.9%
69.4%
41.4%
Visible blood in stool sample
14.7%
7.8%
4.8%
63.0%
Occult blood 
59.1%
52.0%
43.4%
82.8%
Fecal leukocytes
37.8%
42.9%
29.4%
70.5%
Leukocytes > 10,000/mcL
58.0%
42.0%
45.3%
70.9%
Modified from Slutsker L et al. Escherichia coli O157:H7 diarrhea in the United States: clinical and epidemiologic fea-
tures.Ann Intern Med. 1997;126:505–513.
208 /  CHAPTER 12
(1) Traveler’s diarrhea (usually E coli) can usually be
treated empirically.
(2) Other infections associated with travel (Entamoeba
histolytica, G lamblia) benefit from treatment.
2. Does the patient have an underlying disease that makes
treatment more necessary?
a. Immunosuppression
b. Inflammatory bowel disease
3. Are there public health reasons that a diagnosis needs to be
made?
a. Possible outbreak of food-borne illness
b. Patient might potentially spread disease (healthcare
worker, daycare worker, food handler).
D. Is there a reason not to culture?
1. Stool cultures and ova and parasite exams of hospitalized
patients are particularly unrevealing.
2. Consider limiting in-hospital cultures to the following cir-
cumstances:
a. Onset of diarrhea within 3 days of admission
b. Onset > 3 days but
(1) Patient is older than 65 years and has comorbidities.
(2) Patient has HIV infection.
(3) Neutropenia is present.
(4) Extraintestinal manifestations are present.
(5) There is an outbreak of diarrhea in the hospital.
Patients with more severe clinical presentations,
including high fever, abdominal pain, and dysen-
tery, should always have stool cultures taken.
E. Diagnostic tests other than stool cultures are useful in certain
situations.
1. C difficile toxin for patients exposed to antibiotics or pro-
ton pump inhibitors
2. Shiga toxin to identify E coli 0157 in all patients with
bloody diarrhea
3. Fecal leukocytes may be helpful in deciding which patients
are more likely to have positive stool cultures.
a. Sensitivity, 73%; specificity, 84%
b. LR+, 4.56; LR−, 0.32
4. WBC
a. WBC is neither sensitive nor specific for the presence
of invasive bacterial infections.
b. A marked left shift, at least if the band count is > neu-
trophil count, suggests bacterial etiology in general and
Shigella in particular.
Treatment
A. Severe diarrhea with bloody stool is often (and appropriately)
treated empirically while cultures are pending.
B. Empiric therapy is generally with a quinolone.
C. Some very important caveats should be kept in mind when
empirically treating suspected bacterial diarrhea or dysentery. 
1. Antibiotics shorten the course of diarrhea caused by
Shigella and Campylobacter.
2. There is quinolone resistance in some strains of Campy-
lobacter, so empiric therapy should be broadened to
include a macrolide if the suspicion for Campylobacter is
high or if the patient is very ill. 
3. Antibiotics should be withheld if the patient is at high risk
for STEC (see below).
4. Antibiotics are only beneficial for salmonella infections in
the case of typhoid or severe disease.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
The patient is given IV fluids in the office. After receiving
acetaminophen and 2 L of fluid she is feeling somewhat bet-
ter. Stool cultures are sent. A CBC and Chem-7 are normal.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, Campylobacter infec-
tion? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Shigella Infection
Textbook Presentation
Shigella infection often begins with fever and constitutional
symptoms. Diarrhea is initially watery and may become
bloody. The diarrhea can be very frequent. Tenesmus is often
prominent.
Disease Highlights
A. Although there is a spectrum of disease (some Shigella species
can cause milder disease), a patient who is systemically ill with
classic dysentery (frequent bloody stools with tenesmus) is
most likely to have Shigella infection.
B. Incidence in 2006 was 6.1 cases/100,000 people.
C. Table 12–6 lists some of the common symptoms in patients
with Shigella. 
D. Shigella is a highly infectious organism with as few as 10
organisms causing disease. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Because of the highly invasive nature of Shigella, some of the
tests that reveal colonic inflammation are more useful in
detecting Shigella than other organisms.
1. Sensitivity of band count > 1% = 85%.
2. Sensitivity of fecal leukocytes is at least 70%.
B. Stool culture is gold standard.
Treatment
A. Shigella dysentery clearly benefits from treatment.
B. The drug of choice is oral ciprofloxacin.
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  209
Alternative Diagnosis: Shiga Toxin–Producing
E coli (0157:H7) Infection
Textbook Presentation
The presentation of E coli depends on the type. STEC usually
presents with diarrhea and abdominal pain. The pain is often
worse in the right lower quadrant. Bloody diarrhea is very com-
mon, while nausea, vomiting, and fever are not.
Disease Highlights
A. The secreted Shiga toxin is primarily responsible for disease.
B. Symptoms include bloody diarrhea (seen in most infected
patients), severe abdominal pain, and absence of fever.
C. Incidence in 2006 was 1.3 cases/100,000 people.
D. STEC is associated with HUS. 
1. HUS is the simultaneous presence of a microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and acute renal
failure.
2. HUS occurs mainly in children and effects 5–10% of chil-
dren infected with STEC.
3. About 5% of cases HUS/thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura (TTP) in adults are related to STEC. 
E. Other than STEC, there are 4 types of E coli that cause diar-
rheal illness in adults. Information about the E coli diseases
other than STEC is listed in Table 12–7.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Table 12–6 lists some common symptoms in patients with
diarrhea secondary to STEC.
B. Patients infected with STEC are significantly more likely than
patients infected with other pathogens to
1. Report bloody diarrhea
2. Provide visibly bloody specimens
3. Not report fever
4. Have abdominal tenderness
5. Have a WBC > 10,000/mcL
C. If an organism is isolated from a patient with bloody diarrhea,
it is most likely to be Shigella or Campylobacter. On the other
hand, a patient infected with enterohemorrhagic E coli
(EHEC) is more likely to have bloody diarrhea than a patient
with Shigella or Campylobacter infection.
D. Positive culture and detected Shiga toxin are considered diag-
nostic.
E. Culture for STEC often must be specifically requested.
Treatment
A. Treatment of STEC is controversial.
B. Studies have reported no effect, an increase in risk of HUS,
and beneficial effects with antibiotics.
C. Antibiotics are generally thought to not be indicated in the
treatment of STEC. 
CASE RESOLUTION
2
The patient was treated with supportive therapy.
Antidiarrheals were withheld because of her bloody diar-
rhea. Ciprofloxacin was prescribed empirically. Her stool
was sent for culture.
Her stool cultures were negative, and her symptoms
resolved within 3 days.
The resolution of this case is not surprising. The decision to treat
the patient was based on 2 things: she appeared quite ill and the
presentation was thought to be consistent with Campylobacter
infection. Even though stool cultures have the highest yield in
patients with bloody stool, about 67% of the cultures will still be
negative. Also not surprising is her rapid improvement since this
is generally the course of infectious diarrhea.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Travelers’ Diarrhea
Textbook Presentation
Patients with traveler’s diarrhea usually become ill in the first 5
days of their trips from a temperate climate to a tropical one. They
usually have mild symptoms of a gastroenteritis-like illness.
Patients are often better by the time they return home.
Disease Highlights
A. Up to 10 million cases yearly
B. The highest risk destinations for traveler’s diarrhea are in Asia,
Africa, and South and Central America.
C. Disease usually occurs in the first 5 days (with a peak onset at
4 days) and resolves in 1–5 days.
D. Symptoms are usually of mild to moderate diarrhea but more
severe symptoms can occur.
E. Although the predominant cause of traveler’s diarrhea is
enterotoxigenic E coli (ETEC), any bacteria, virus, or parasite
Table 12–7. Diarrhea-producing E coli other than Shiga
toxin– producing E coli.
Common 
Type
Abbreviation
Characteristics
Enterotoxigenic
ETEC
Symptoms caused
Escherichia coli
by toxin
Watery diarrhea
Common cause of
traveler’s diarrhea
Enteropathogenic E coli
EPEC
Common cause of 
diarrhea in adults
and children
Enteroinvasive E coli
EIEC
Causes bloody diarrhea 
with tenesmus similar
to Shigella
Enteroaggregative E coli
EAEC
Cause of traveler’s
diarrhea of secondary
importance
210 /  CHAPTER 12
can be causative. Enteroaggregative E coli (EAEC) seems to be
another important cause.  
F. It is important to consider infections particularly common in
certain locations.
1. St. Petersburg: G lamblia
2. Wilderness streams in Western US: G lamblia
3. Nepal: Cyclospora, G lamblia
4. India: E histolytica
G. Because these infections usually occur far from the patient’s
physician, the doctor’s role is usually advisory.
1. Prevention
a. Ensure clean water
(1) Boiled, filtered, or chemically purified local water.
(2) Carbonated beverages and bottled water
b. Bismuth before meals
(1) Decreases risk of diarrhea
(2) Need to balance against the risk of included salicy-
lates
c. Prophylactic antibiotics are not recommended unless
traveler is at special risk.
d. Gastric acidity is natural prevention; temporarily dis-
continue proton pump inhibitors or H2-blockers, if
safe.
e. CDC website has very useful information for patients.
2. Advise patients of common mistakes.
a. Ice and mixed drinks are often made with contami-
nated water.
b. Ensure bottled water is sealed and not just bottled tap
water.
c. As the renowned parasitologist Dr. B. H. Kean once
said, “The only way to clean lettuce is with a blow-
torch.”
d. Any food heated for a prolonged time is potentially
dangerous.
e. Fruit is only safe if the traveler peels it.
f. A recent study reported that among table top sauces
collected from restaurants in Guadalajara and tested
for diarrheogenic E coli, 4 of 43 contained ETEC and
14 of 32 contained EAEC.
Treatment
A. Supportive care
B. Avoid antidiarrheals if dysentery is present.
C. Antibiotics are warranted.
1. Ciprofloxacin, azithromycin, and rifamaxin are the pre-
ferred agents.
2. Decrease symptoms (from 3 days to 1 day)
3. Consider causes of traveler’s diarrhea other than ETEC
(such as giardiasis, amebiasis), which require different
therapies.
REFERENCES
Adachi JA, Mathewson JJ, Jiang ZD, Ericsson CD, DuPont HL. Enteric pathogens
in Mexican sauces of popular restaurants in Guadalajara, Mexico, and Hous-
ton, Texas. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136(12):884–7.
Bartlett JG. Clinical practice. Antibiotic-associated diarrhea. N Engl J Med.
2002;346(5):334–9.
Brodsky RE, Spencer HC Jr, Schultz MG. Giardiasis in American travelers to the
Soviet Union. J Infect Dis. 1974;130(3):319–23.
Guerrant RL, Van Gilder T, Steiner TS et al. Practice guidelines for the manage-
ment of infectious diarrhea. Clin Infect Dis. 2001;32(3):331–51.
Hogenauer C, Langner C, Beubler E et al. Klebsiella oxytoca as a causative organ-
ism of antibiotic-associated hemorrhagic colitis. N Engl J Med.
2006;355(23):2418–26.
Mead PS, Slutsker L, Dietz V et al. Food-related illness and death in the United
States. Emerg Infect Dis. 1999;5(5):607–25.
Musher DM, Musher BL. Contagious acute gastrointestinal infections. N Engl J
Med. 2004;351(23):2417–27.
Preliminary FoodNet data on the incidence of infection with pathogens transmit-
ted commonly through food-10 states, 2006. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2007;56(14):336–9.
Slutsker L, Ries AA, Greene KD, Wells JG, Hutwagner L, Griffin PM. Escherichia
coli O157:H7 diarrhea in the United States: clinical and epidemiologic fea-
tures. Ann Intern Med. 1997;126(7):505–13.
Steffen R, Collard F, Tornieporth N et al. Epidemiology, etiology, and impact of
traveler’s diarrhea in Jamaica. JAMA. 1999;281(9):811–7.
Talan D, Moran GJ, Newdow M et al. Etiology of bloody diarrhea among patients
presenting to United States emergency departments: prevalence of
Escherichia coli O157:H7 and other enteropathogens. Clin Infect Dis.
2001;32(4):573–80.
Thielman NM, Guerrant RL. Clinical practice. Acute infectious diarrhea. N Engl
J Med. 2004;350(1):38–47.
Yoder JS, Beach MJ. Giardiasis surveillance--United States, 2003-2005. MMWR
Surveill Summ. 2007;56(7):11–8.
ACUTE DIARRHEA /  211
History and physical exam.
Concentrate on exposures, severity of
illness, presence of dysentery and
potential of infecting others.
Has disease been present for < 4 days?
Does patient appear non-toxic and
have, non-bloody stool? 
Supportive care
Is there suspicion for noninfectious
cause?
Discontinue offending agent
Yes
Traveler’s diarrhea
Severe diarrhea without
dysentery
Prolonged diarrhea
(> 10 days)
Antibiotic-associated
diarrhea
Severe diarrhea with
dysentery and toxic
appearing patient
No
No
Empiric therapy,
culture not usually
necessary.
STEC, Shiga toxin–producing Escherichia coli.
Culture and consider
empiric therapy. Never
empirically treat if 
STEC high in differential,
recognize that therapy
only effective for
Shigella and
Campylobacter.
Culture and supportive
care.
Culture, consider
parasitic diseases.
Empiric therapy for
Giardia is reasonable
either before cultures or
if work-up negative.
Discontinue offending
agent.
Culture for C difficle if
patient is ill,
immunocompromised,
hospitalized or elderly or
if symptoms persist.
If signs of inflammatory
colitis, empiric
therapy is warranted.
Yes
Figure 12–1. Diagnostic approach: diarrhea.
?
13
CHIEF COMPLAINT 
PATIENT 
1
Mr. J is a 32-year-old man who comes to your office com-
plaining of dizziness.
What is the differential diagnosis of dizzi-
ness? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL 
DIAGNOSIS
The framework for dizziness recognizes that most patients who
complain of dizziness are actually complaining of 1 of 4 distinct
sensations (Figure 13–1): 
1. Vertigo 
2. Near syncope
3. Dysequilibrium 
4. Nonspecific dizziness 
The first pivotal step in evaluating the dizzy patient is to clarify
the patient’s symptom, since each of the above sensations has its
own distinct differential diagnosis and evaluation. Therefore, the
first and most important question is “What does it feel like when
you are dizzy?” At this point, patients must be given enough time,
without interruptions or suggestions, to describe their dizziness as
clearly as possible. Commonly used descriptions, their precipi-
tants, and differential diagnosis are listed in Table 13–1. The
patient’s description of the symptom and precipitant helps select
the proper sensation, which is crucial to the remainder of the
evaluation. The duration of the dizziness is also diagnostically
useful. 
Differential Diagnosis of Dizziness
A. Vertigo is the most common cause of dizziness. Vertigo may
arise from diseases of the inner ear (peripheral) or diseases of
the brainstem (central). About 90% of patients with vertigo
have a peripheral etiology.
1. Peripheral
a. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)
b. Labyrinthitis or vestibular neuritis
c. Meniere disease
d. Uncommon etiologies: head trauma, herpes zoster
2. Central
a. Cerebrovascular disease
(1) Vertebrobasilar insufficiency
(2) Cerebellar or brainstem stroke
(3) Cerebellar hemorrhage 
(4) Vertebral artery dissection
b. Cerebellar degeneration
c. Migraine
d. Multiple sclerosis (MS)
e. Alcohol intoxication
f. Phenytoin toxicity
g. Tumors of the brainstem or cerebellum
B. Near syncope is a common cause of severe dizziness, particularly
in the elderly. (See Chapter 26, Syncope.)
C. Dysequilibrium. Etiologies include
1. Multiple sensory deficits
2. Parkinson disease 
3. Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
4. Cerebellar disease (degeneration, tumor, infarction)
5. Peripheral neuropathy (ie, diabetes)
6. Dorsal column lesions
a. B12 deficiency
b. Syphilis
c. Compressive lesions
7. Drugs (alcohol, benzodiazepines, anticonvulsants, amino-
glycosides, antihypertensives, muscle relaxants, cisplatin)
D. Nonspecific dizziness. Etiologies include
1. Psychological 
a. Major depression
b. Anxiety, panic disorder
c. Somatization disorder
2. Recently corrected vision (new glasses, cataract removal)
3. Medication side effect
1
Mr. J reports that when he is dizzy, it feels as though the
room is spinning. His first episode occurred 3 days ago
when he rolled over in bed. The spinning sensation was
very intense, causing nausea and vomiting. It lasted less
than 1 minute.
I have a patient with dizziness.
How do I determine the cause?
212
DIZZINESS /  213
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Clearly, Mr. J is describing vertigo, the most common complaint
in patients with dizziness. Patients with vertigo complain that
either they or their surroundings are spinning. Vertigo develops
secondary to disorders in either the peripheral nervous system or
Dizziness
What does it feel like when you’re dizzy?
Near-syncope
(Fainting)
Vertigo
(Spinning)
Dysequilibrium
(Falling)
Nonspecific
dizziness
See Chapter 26,
Syncope
Go to
Figure 13–2
Go to
Figure 13–4
Screen for
depression
and anxiety
Figure 13–1. Diagnostic approach: dizziness.
Table 13–1. Classification and characteristics of dizziness.
Nonspecific
Vertigo
Near Syncope
Dysequilibrium
Dizziness
Chief complaint
Spinning or 
Nearly
Falling 
Floating Vague
“merry-go-round”
fainting
Loss of balance
Typical 
Turning over 
Standing
Walking
Stress
precipitants
in bed 
Looking up to shelf
Important 
Attack duration
CAD HF
Diabetes
Multiple somatic
historical 
CNS signs or symptoms
History of syncope
Neuropathy
complaints 
features
(eg, dysarthria, ataxia,
Palpitations
Visual problems
Feeling down or 
diplopia, headache,
Medications
Imbalance
hopeless
neck pain) 
Melena or rectal 
Medications
Anhedonia
Peripheral symptoms 
bleeding
(eg, hearing loss, tinnitus)
Key physical 
Cranial nerve exam
Orthostatic blood 
Gait
exam findings
Gait 
pressure and pulse
Sensation
Finger-to-nose exam 
Cardiac exam
Position sense
Dix-Hallpike maneuver
Cranial nerve exam
Finger-to-nose exam
Differential 
Peripheral: BPPV,
Dehydration
Multiple sensory 
Depression
diagnosis
Vestibular neuritis,
Hemorrhage
deficits
Generalized 
Meniere disease
Orthostatic 
Parkinson disease
anxiety 
Central: CVA, MS,
hypotension
Cerebellar 
disorder
cerebellar hemorrhage,
Vasovagal
degeneration 
Panic attacks
migraine, brainstem 
Arrhythmias
or stroke
Somatization 
tumors
Hypoglycemia
B12 deficiency
disorder
Aortic stenosis 
Tabes dorsalis
PE
Myelopathy
BPPV, benign paroxysmal positional vertigo; CAD, coronary artery disease; CVA, cerebrovascular accident; HF, heart fail-
ure; MS, multiple sclerosis; PE, pulmonary embolism.
the CNS. Peripheral vertigo usually stems from disease in the
semicircular canals and is far more common than central vertigo.
Central vertigo occurs in patients with disorders involving the
brainstem. While less common, central vertigo is serious and may
be caused by stroke, hemorrhage, tumors, and MS. Therefore, the
first pivotal step in the evaluation of a patient with vertigo is to
distinguish peripheral from central vertigo. Features that suggest
central vertigo include CNS signs or symptoms, headache, significant
imbalance, and cerebrovascular risk factors (Figure 13–2). Central
vertigo is suggested by abnormalities in the neurologic exam (par-
ticularly ataxia or cranial nerve abnormalities) and nystagmus that
is vertical, downbeating or upbeating, persistent (> 1 minute), or
fails to stop with repetition. Table 13–2 summarizes the differences
between peripheral and central vertigo.
1
On further questioning, Mr. J reports that he had a
similar episode 5 years ago. Other than nausea, he has
no other symptoms. Specifically, he has not noticed any
diplopia (double vision), imbalance, dysarthria (slurred
speech), ataxia, incoordination, or headaches. He has
no risk factors for cerebrovascular disease (diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, coronary artery disease, periph-
eral vascular disease). He has no prior history of neu-
rologic complaints (eg, unilateral vision loss of optic
neuritis or motor weakness). On physical exam, he
appears anxious. His vital signs are BP, 110/70 mm Hg;
RR, 16 breaths per minute; pulse, 84 bpm; temperature,
37.0°C. HEENT exam reveals extraocular muscles
intact with 15 beats of horizontal nystagmus on left
lateral gaze. This stops after repeating the maneuver
several times. Optic disks are sharp and visual fields
are intact to confrontation. Cardiac, pulmonary, and
abdominal exams are normal. On neurologic exam, cra-
nial nerves are intact (except for nystagmus). Hearing
is grossly normal. Gait and finger-to-nose testing are
normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
214 /  CHAPTER 13
FP
Are any features of CNS vertigo
present?
1. CNS signs1
2. CNS symptoms1
3. Severe headache or neck pain
4. Significant imbalance
5. Cerebrovascular risk factors
Central vertigo
Image CNS (MRI)
Consider Meniere
disease, infarction of
labyrinthine
Audiogram, ENT referral
Duration
Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo: Recurrent
episodes, lasting seconds to < 1 minute
Meniere disease: Recurrent attacks lasting minutes to
hours, associated tinnitus, unilateral hearing loss
Vestibular neuronitis: Single attack lasting days
Loss of
hearing
Peripheral vertigo
Yes
No
1CNS symptoms: dysarthria, diplopia, abnormal gait, weakness, incoordination
 CNS signs: cranial nerve abnormalities, ataxia, positive Romberg, abnormal nystagmus (eg, nystagmus seen on
 both leftward and rightward gaze does not fatigue with repetition of maneuver, lasts > 1 minutes, is not
 suppressed by visual fixation or is purely vertical or is downbeating)
Figure 13–2. Diagnostic approach: vertigo.
DIZZINESS /  215
Fortunately, Mr. J does not have any CNS symptoms or neuro-
logic signs to suggest central vertigo. You strongly suspect periph-
eral vertigo. The leading hypothesis is BPPV. Vestibular neuritis
and Meniere disease are active alternatives (Table 13–3).
Leading Hypothesis: Benign Paroxysmal
Positional Vertigo (BPPV)
Textbook Presentation 
BPPV typically presents with abrupt onset of severe dizziness.
Patients often describe it as feeling like the room is spinning. They
often note that the symptoms began when they rolled over in bed,
looked up (to get something out of a closet), or bent down to tie
their shoe. Each episode is brief (lasting 10-20 seconds) rather
than persistent (as in vestibular neuritis). However, since the
episodes occur in clusters, patients often complain of vertigo that
occurs for days or weeks. A careful history can help make this dis-
tinction. Symptoms may recur years later.
Determining the duration of a single episode of ver-
tigo is critical to establish the correct diagnosis.
Disease Highlights
A. Most common cause of vertigo
B. Vertigo precipitated by positional changes
C. Vertigo is brief, usually lasting < 15 seconds but may last as
long as 90 seconds.
D. Patients typically have clusters of attacks over several weeks to
1 month and then remission. Recurrent clusters occur in
about half of patients.
E. Secondary to free-floating canalith usually within posterior
semicircular canal. The precipitant is usually unknown,
although BPPV may follow labyrinthitis or head trauma. 
Table 13–2. Features distinguishing central from peripheral vertigo.
Finding
Peripheral Vertigo
Central Vertigo
CNS symptoms and signs 
Rare
Common
(eg, dysarthria, diplopia 
[double vision], ataxia,
cranial nerve palsies)
Imbalance
Mild to moderate1
Severe
Nystagmus characteristics
Inhibited by fixation
Not inhibited by fixation
Unidirectional 
May change direction
Horizontal with torsional 
May be purely vertical,
component
downbeating or torsional
Lasts < 1 minute 
Lasts > 1 minute
Fatigues with repetition
Does not fatigue
Duration of single episode
Depends on etiology
Depends on etiology
Risk factors for vascular disease
May be present or absent 
Commonly present
Nausea and vomiting
Severe
Variable, may be minimal
Severity of vertigo
Severe
Less severe to none
Hearing loss
May be present in otosclerosis,
Uncommon. May occur in 
Meniere disease
labyrinth infarctions
1Patients with peripheral lesions can usually walk, whereas those with central lesions may have great difficulty.
Table 13–3. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. J.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Benign paroxysmal Vertigo lasts seconds,
Thorough neurologic 
positional vertigo
precipitated by rolling
history and physical 
over in bed or looking exam (to exclude CNS 
up to shelf
lesions)
Peripheral type 
nystagmus
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Vestibular neuritis
Vertigo lasts for days
Thorough neurologic 
Peripheral type 
history and physical 
nystagmus 
exam (to exclude CNS 
lesions)
Meniere disease
Vertigo lasts for 
Thorough neurologic 
minutes to hours
history and physical 
Tinnitus, intermittent 
exam
hearing loss
Audiogram
Peripheral type 
nystagmus
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Patients with all 4 of the following criteria usually have BPPV
(88% sensitive, 92% specific; LR+ 11, LR– 0.13):
1. Recurrent vertigo
2. Duration of attack < 1 minute
3. Symptoms invariably provoked by changing head position
a. Lying down or turning over in bed or
b. 2 of the following: Reclining the head, rising from
supine, or bending forward
4. Not attributable to another disorder
B. One study reported the following symptoms in patients with
BPPV:
1. All patients with BPPV complained that the vertigo was
provoked by turning over in bed. 
2. 50% of patients complained of imbalance but falling was
rare (only 1/61) and should raise the concern for another
disorder. 
C. Positional nystagmus has a mixed rotary and horizontal com-
ponent and can be precipitated by the Dix-Hallpike maneu-
ver (Figure 13–3). 
1. Nystagmus usually begins after a few seconds, is brief 
(< 30 seconds), and fatigues with repetition of maneuver.
2. Sensitivity, 42-78%; specificity 94%
3. Nystagmus that begins immediately, lasts longer than 
1 minute or fails to fatigue suggests a central (brainstem)
disorder.
D. CNS imaging should be performed in patients with findings
that suggest central disease and in patients with atypical find-
ings for BPPV.
Treatment
A. Most patients recover regardless of therapy; however, sponta-
neous resolution can take weeks to months.
B. The Epley maneuver is a complex rotational maneuver that
repositions the canalith and is 85–95% effective at stopping
vertigo. 
C. Vestibular suppressants (meclizine and benzodiazepines) may
delay CNS adaptation and should be used only when necessary
for patients with frequent intolerable spells.
D. Surgical options are available for patients with refractory
symptoms but are rarely necessary.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. J’s history is characteristic of BPPV. At this point,
the Dix-Hallpike maneuver should be performed to evalu-
ate positional nystagmus. 
Mr. J reports intense vertigo with the maneuver. Hor-
izontal nystagmus with a rotary component is noted,
which lasts for 20 seconds. After repeating the maneu-
ver, the nystagmus disappears.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, BPPV? Have you ruled
out the active alternatives? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
The clinical history, exam, and lack of risk factors for CNS disease
all point to peripheral rather than central vertigo. The brief
episodes strongly suggest BPPV. Other peripheral causes of vertigo
should be considered. 
Alternative Diagnoses:
Acute Vestibular Neuritis
Textbook Presentation 
Acute vestibular neuritis typically presents abruptly with severe con-
stant vertigo and nausea made worse by head turning that lasts for
days. Subsequently, patients may complain of intermittent vertigo that
occurs for weeks to months and is precipitated by head movement.
Disease Highlights
A. Acute vestibular neuritis may follow viral infection involving
the vestibular nerve and the labyrinth. 
B. Patients often have spontaneous vestibular nystagmus that is
unilateral, horizontal, or horizontal and torsional and sup-
pressed by visual fixation. 
C. Nausea and vomiting are common.
D. Gait instability may be present, but patients maintain the
ability to ambulate.
E. Severe vertigo typically lasts 2-3 days and may last up to 1 week. 
F. Hearing may be impaired.
G. Ramsay Hunt syndrome is a variant of vestibular neuritis.
1. Varicella zoster reactivation involving cranial nerves VII
and VIII produces vestibular neuritis with hearing loss and
facial weakness. 
2. Vesicles are seen in the external auditory canal. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is usually made clinically.
B. Cerebellar infarction may present like vestibular neuritis and
needs to be carefully considered (see below). 
C. Perform MRI or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) to
evaluate patients with persistent vertigo for cerebellar infarc-
tion if any of the following features are present: 
1. Headache 
2. Weakness 
3. Dysmetria 
4. Inability to ambulate 
5. Cranial nerve findings 
6. Skew deviation1
7. Nystagmus which is not suppressed by visual fixation 
8. Risk factors for vascular disease 
9. Persistence of severe vertigo beyond a few days
216 /  CHAPTER 13
1In skew deviation, the eyes move in different directions with upward
gaze; this suggests a central lesion. 
FP
DIZZINESS /  217
B
Gravity
Gravity
Gravity
A
Superior
canal
Posterior
canal
Utriculus
Posterior-canal
ampulla
Particles
45°
Sagittal body plane
Gravity
Superior
canal
Posterior
canal
Utriculus
Posterior-canal
ampulla
Particles
Vantage
point
Vantage
point
Figure 13–3. The Dix-Hallpike test of a patient with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo affecting the right ear.
A: The examiner stands at the patient’s right side and rotates the patient’s head 45 degrees to the right to align the
right posterior semicircular canal with the sagittal plane of the body. B: The examiner moves the patient, whose
eyes are open, from the seated to the supine right-ear-down position and then extends the patient’s neck slightly
so that the chin is pointed slightly upward.The latency, duration, and direction of nystagmus, if present, and the
latency and duration of vertigo, if present, should be noted.The red arrows in the inset depict the direction of nys-
tagmus in patients with typical benign paroxysmal positional vertigo.The presumed location in the labyrinth of the
free-floating debris thought to cause the disorder is also shown. (Reproduced, with permission, from Furman JM,
Cass SP. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. N Engl J Med. 1999;341(21):1590–6.)
218 /  CHAPTER 13
Treatment
A. Meclizine (antihistamine), dimenhydrinate, and scopolamine
(anticholinergic) are drugs of choice in most patients.
B. Promethazine (especially for severe nausea, vomiting)
C. Benzodiazepines have also been used. 
D. Medications are sedating. Driving should be avoided.
E. Corticosteroids have been demonstrated to improve vestibular
recovery, although the impact on symptoms is unclear. 
F. Vestibular rehabilitation using exercises that stimulate the
labyrinth can promote CNS adaptation. 
Alternative Diagnosis: Meniere Disease 
Textbook Presentation 
Patients complain of intermittent spells of vertigo. They may note
associated ear fullness, unilateral hearing loss, and tinnitus. Spells
typically last for minutes to hours (rarely longer than 4-5 hours)
and occasionally up to a day. 
Disease Highlights 
Secondary to excess fluid in the endolymphatic spaces of the
inner ear.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnostic criteria of the American Academy of Otolaryngol-
ogy and Head and Neck Surgery requires the following for a
definite diagnosis:
1. Two spontaneous episodes of vertigo lasting > 20 minutes
2. Confirmed sensorineural hearing loss
3. Tinnitus or perception of aural fullness, or both
B. Audiometry should be performed.
1. Early Meniere disease is characterized by low frequency
sensorineural hearing loss.
2. Hearing can be normal between attacks.
C. Test should be done to rule out syphilis (fluorescent trepone-
mal antibody absorption [FTA-Ab]).
D. Some authors recommend an MRI to rule out CNS lesions
(tumors, Arnold-Chiari malformations, MS).
Treatment
A. Specialty consultation is advised.
B. Low salt diet
C. Anecdotal evidence suggests restriction of caffeine and tobacco.
D. Diuretics reduce vertigo.
E. Surgical therapies are available for patients with refractory
incapacitating symptoms. 
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mr. J’s history, physical exam, and response to Dix-
Hallpike maneuver are entirely consistent with peripheral
vertigo. There are no alarm features to suggest central
vertigo. The duration of each vertiginous episode sug-
gests BPPV rather than vestibular neuritis or Meniere
disease. There is no tinnitus or hearing loss to suggest
Meniere disease. Further testing is not indicated.
An Epley maneuver is performed resulting in resolution
of Mr. J’s symptoms. One month later he returns and is
feeling well. 
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mr. D. is a 29-year-old white man who complains of dizzi-
ness. Detailed questioning reveals that he has had a
constant spinning sensation for the last several weeks.
He has no history of similar episodes or hearing loss.
Although head movement exacerbates the symptom, it
is persistent even when he is still. He has not experi-
enced diplopia, dysarthria, arm or leg weakness, or visual
loss. He has no history of hypertension, diabetes, or
cocaine use. He has a prior history of migraines for sev-
eral years. Vertigo has never preceded or accompanied
the headache. On physical exam his vital signs are BP,
126/82 mm Hg; pulse, 74 bpm; RR, 16 breaths per
minute; temperature, 37.0°C. HEENT exam reveals hori-
zontal nystagmus on leftward and rightward gaze that
lasts 1-2 minutes. The nystagmus does not fatigue with
repetition of the maneuver. Pupils are equal, round, react
to light and accommodation. Cardiac, pulmonary, and
abdominal exams are normal. Neurologic exam reveals nor-
mal gait, motor strength, sensation, negative Romberg,
and intact cranial nerves with the exception of the nys-
tagmus noted above. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this 
differential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Again, the first task in evaluating the dizzy patient is to properly
identify whether the patient has vertigo, near syncope, dysequilib-
rium, or nonspecific dizziness. Mr. D is clearly suffering from ver-
tigo. Our next step is to determine whether the disease process is
central or peripheral. Mr. D’s persistent vertigo, lasting weeks,
argues strongly for a central cause. BPPV and Meniere disease are
DIZZINESS /  219
not associated with vertigo of such long duration. Vestibular neu-
ritis can last for days and occasionally weeks. However, Mr. D’s
prolonged nystagmus, which does not fatigue and is bidirectional,
is a pivotal finding and strongly suggests a central process. Central
processes that may cause vertigo include migraine, cerebrovascular
disease, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, vertebral artery dissection,
cerebellar hemorrhage, MS, and CNS tumors. The patient’s age
and absence of hypertension or diabetes makes cerebrovascular
disease, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, or CNS tumor unlikely. The
prior history of headaches and the patient’s young age make
migraine the leading hypothesis. Table 13–4 summarizes the dif-
ferential diagnosis.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Migraine & Vertigo 
Textbook Presentation
Classically, migraine sufferers complain of intermittent attacks 
of severe unilateral throbbing headache associated with photophobia,
phonophobia, nausea and vomiting (see Chapter 18, Headache).
Headaches may be preceded by a visual aura (scotoma or scintil-
lating lights). Occasionally, an associated symptom is vertigo.
This discussion will be limited to migraine and vertigo. 
Disease Highlights
A. Suggested criteria for definite migrainous vertigo include:
1. Recurrent episodic vertigo
2. Current or prior history of migraine
3. One of the following symptoms during at least 2 vertiginous
attacks:
a. Migrainous headache
b. Photophobia
c. Phonophobia
d. Visual or other auras
4. Other causes ruled out by appropriate diagnostic studies
B. Vertigo may last several hours or days and may be sponta-
neous or positional. 
C. Brainstem signs are rare.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. In patients with vertigo due to migraine, vertigo may precede,
be concurrent with, or temporally unrelated to headache.
B. Vertigo was regularly associated with headache in 45% of
patients and occurred with and without headache in 48% of
patients. In 6% of patients, vertigo and migraine did not
occur together. 
C. In patients with a history of migraine and vertigo but without
a clear temporal association of the two, other diagnoses
should still be explored. Findings that suggest migraine as a
possible etiology include
1. Typical migraine precipitants cause vertigo 
2. Migraine medications alleviate vertigo 
Treatment
See Chapter 18, Headache.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, migraine? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses? 
Although Mr. D’s history suggests a migraine disorder, there is no
temporal association of Mr. D’s vertigo and migraine. Furthermore,
the continuous vertigo lasting for weeks is atypical for migraine, and the
abnormal neurologic exam (nonfatiguing, bidirectional nystagmus)
raises the possibility of a serious CNS disorder such as a cerebellar
hemorrhage, vertebral artery dissection, or MS.
Alternative Diagnosis: Cerebellar Hemorrhage
Textbook Presentation 
The textbook presentation of cerebellar hemorrhage is the abrupt
onset of headache associated with vomiting, ataxia, and vertigo.
The hemorrhage may occur with exertion or at rest. Patients may
have incoordination and ataxia. Brainstem compression may pro-
duce weakness, cranial nerve abnormalities, coma, and death.
Patients with cerebellar infarctions have similar symptoms.
Disease Highlights
A. Cerebellar hemorrhage accounts for 5-16% cases of intracere-
bral hemorrhages.
B. Etiologies are heterogeneous: 
1. Most common: Hypertensive hemorrhage, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, amyloid angiopathy, and arteriovenous mal-
formations
2. Less common: Blood dyscrasias, hemorrhagic infarction,
septic emboli, anticoagulant and thrombolytic therapy,
neoplasms, herpes simplex virus encephalitis, cocaine and
amphetamine use
C. Demographics 
1. Mean age is 61–73 years 
2. Frequency of intracranial hemorrhage: Asians > Blacks >
Hispanics > Whites 
3. 36% of patients have diabetes mellitus 
4. 32-73% of patients have hypertension 
5. 14% of patients have coagulation disorders 
6. 16% of patients have liver disease
D. Presentation
1. Headache is the initial symptom in 80% of patients.
Cerebellar hemorrhage must be considered in
patients who complain of acute headache and
vertigo.
2. 60% of patients are comatose at presentation.
3. Rapid progression within minutes to hours is common. 
220 /  CHAPTER 13
a. 38% of patients demonstrate an increase in the hematoma
on repeat CT scan 3 hours after the initial scan. 
b. Hematoma expansion is associated with a 5× increase
in poor outcomes and death.
4. Neck stiffness, facial weakness, and gaze palsy may be seen.
E. Complications
1. Hydrocephalus (48%)
2. Chronic disability
3. Herniation and death (42%)
4. Other: Pneumonia, myocardial infarction, ventricular
arrhythmias
F. Poor prognostic factors include
1. Marked hydrocephalus
2. Deteriorating consciousness
3. Stupor and coma (100% mortality without surgery)
4. Fever (correlates with ventricular extension of bleeding)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Brainstem findings are common (100% in 1 small study).
B. Laboratory evaluation should include CBC, platelet count,
INR, partial thromboplastin time, basic metabolic panel,
ECG, chest radiograph, glucose and toxicology screen in
young and middle-aged patients.
C. Cross sectional imaging is critical.
1. Noncontrast CT and MRI/MRA scans are the tests of
choice. 
2. MRI with MRA can demonstrate saccular aneurysms and
arteriovenous malformations but is not always readily
available or feasible in sick, unstable patients who need
intensive monitoring.
a. Consider aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations
in patients with cerebellar hemorrhage who are
younger than age 60, do not have a convincing history
of hypertension, or have a history of cocaine use.
b. Abnormal results on MRA can be evaluated with cerebral
angiography.
3. Prompt imaging is vital. 
Treatment
A. Cerebellar hemorrhages can compress vital brainstem struc-
tures and surgical evacuation can be lifesaving, particularly in
large hemorrhages (> 3 cm) or those with brainstem com-
pression or hydrocephalus. 
1. Surgical evacuation of these hematomas is recommended.
2. Emergent neurosurgical consultation is advised. 
B. ICU monitoring is critical.
C. Anticoagulation should be reversed, if present.
D. Guidelines of potential therapies to treat intracerebral hemor-
rhage, the associated hypertension, and increased intracranial
pressure were published in 2007. 
2
Neither Mr. D’s age nor absence of headache suggest
cerebellar hemorrhage. You wonder about vertebral artery
dissection.
Alternative Diagnosis:Vertebral Artery
Dissection (VAD)
Textbook Presentation 
Unlike patients with atherosclerotic disease, patients with VAD
are usually younger (mean age 48) and complain of severe neck
pain, occipital headache, and evolving neurologic symptoms due
to progressive involvement of the brainstem. Numbness, hemi-
paresis, quadriparesis, coma, a locked-in syndrome, or death can
result from this uncommon but devastating illness. 
Disease Highlights
A. The vertebral artery passes through the transverse process of
C1-C6. As C1 rotates on C2, the vertebral artery can be
stretched and can be injured initiating dissection and subse-
quent thrombosis or aneurysm formation (which may be
complicated by subarachnoid hemorrhage). Thrombosis is
more common and may extend to involve the basilar artery
compromising the entire brainstem. 
B. Pain (from the dissection) is a common feature. 
C. Risk factors differ from patients with typical ischemic stroke.
VAD may occur spontaneously or following trauma, catheter-
ization, sporting activity, or chiropractic cervical manipula-
tion. When secondary to chiropractic manipulation, symp-
toms develop within 1 hour of procedure in 85% of patients.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Warning symptoms are present in 54% of cases; the most
common are occipital headache and neck pain. These symp-
toms are usually sudden, severe, and persistent until other
neurologic signs develop. Headache preceded other neuro-
logic signs and symptoms by 1-14 days.
B. Signs and symptoms 
1. Pain (neck, head, or both) occurs in 85% of cases.
2. Other common symptoms include vertigo (57%), nausea
and vomiting (53%), unilateral facial numbness (46%),
unsteadiness (42%), cerebellar findings (35%), diplopia
(23%), limb weakness (11%).
3. Isolated vertigo and headache are present in 12% of cases.
C. VAD can be visualized with MRA, CTA and conventional
angiography. 
1. MRA and CTA are highly accurate. 
2. Ultrasound with color Doppler is less sensitive for VAD
(66%). 
D. Neuroimaging: Infarction is seen in 65% of scans.
Treatment
A. For patients with VAD and thrombosis, anticoagulation is the
currently recommended therapy. It has been associated with
lower mortality than placebo in uncontrolled trials. For
patients with aneurysm formation, endovascular repair and
surgery have been used.
B. In various series, 20-50% of patients had no or minor resid-
ual defect, 10-56% had major sequelae, and 10-24% died. 
In patients who complain of vertigo and headache,
diagnostic possibilities include migraine, subarach-
noid hemorrhage, cerebellar hemorrhage, and ver-
tebral artery dissection.
DIZZINESS /  221
2
Mr. D reiterates that he has no history of headache or
neck pain. Furthermore, he has no history of trauma or
chiropractic manipulation of the neck. His only
headaches have been those typical of his prior migraines
(and do not suggest intracranial hemorrhage). These
headaches have not been associated with vertigo. 
Mr. D’s nystagmus still suggests central vertigo. After reviewing
his differential diagnosis (Table 13–4) and realizing that migraine,
cerebellar hemorrhage, and VAD are unlikely, you wonder if Mr.
D may have MS. Although less common in men than women, no
other diagnosis is suggested by the clinical features and exam. You
order an MRI.
Have you ruled out the alternative diagnosis of
MS?
Alternative Diagnosis: MS
Textbook Presentation 
MS typically affects young women of Northern European dissent
who experience intermittent neurologic symptoms due to disease
that develops at different times and at different locations in the
CNS. The most common presenting form of MS is relapsing-
remitting MS, characterized by attacks followed by remission with
remyelination. In the majority of patients (58%), this form of the
disease transforms into secondary progressive MS.
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology: MS develops secondary to an inflammatory autoim-
mune disease with multifocal CNS demyelination. Axonal
injury also occurs.
B. Women are affected 2–3 times more than men. 
C. Patients are usually between 18 and 45-years-old at onset.
D. Symptoms worsen in warm environments (ie, in the shower
and during exercise).
E. Several studies suggest that late infection with Epstein-Barr
virus (ie, in adolescence) may predispose patients to MS. 
F. Although MS evolves with time into a multifocal disease, 85% of
patients present with one of several clinically isolated syndromes
(CIS). Conversely, 30% of patients with isolated syndrome
progress to MS. Common initial syndromes include:
1. Partial spinal cord syndromes 
a. Band like sensation
b. Varying degrees of pain, light touch, and propriocep-
tive loss
c. Bilateral sensory loss from a certain level downwards
d. Weakness associated with spasticity, hyperreflexia, and
clonus
e. Electrical sensation from spine into the limbs that
occurs with neck flexion (Lhermitte sign)
2. Optic neuritis 
a. Presenting complaint in 15–20% of patients in whom
MS is subsequently diagnosed
b. Patients complain of monocular visual loss, monocular
visual field loss (scotoma), and difficulty discerning
color that evolves over hours to days.
c. Pain with extraocular movement is common (92%).
d. Afferent pupillary defect (Marcus Gunn pupil) is almost
always seen.
e. Fundoscopic exam is normal in two-thirds of patients.
Swelling of the optic nerve may be seen but hemor-
rhages are rare.
f. With long-term follow-up, MS develops in up to
15–75% of patients with optic neuritis (50–80% if the
MRI scan is abnormal vs 6–22% if the MRI scan lacks
disseminated features of MS). 
3. Intranuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO)
a. The medial longitudinal fasciculus pathway in the
brainstem coordinates conjugate eye movement.
b. An INO develops when a lesion interrupts the medial
longitudinal fasciculus pathway.
c. On lateral gaze, adduction is impaired and nystagmus
develops in the abducting eye. 
d. Convergence is maintained, distinguishing an INO
from a third nerve palsy. 
e. INO is seen in 33–50% of patients with MS. 
f. INO is not specific for MS; it may develop secondary
to vascular disease.
Table 13–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. D.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Migraine
History of recurring 
Thorough neuro-
throbbing headaches 
logic history and 
with or without aura
physical exam (to 
Temporal association 
exclude CNS 
of headache and vertigo
lesions)
MRI
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Cerebellar 
Risks: Hypertension,
Head CT scan or 
hemorrhage
cocaine use, warfarin 
MRI/MRA (see 
therapy
below) 
Other symptoms:
Severe headache at 
onset, vomiting, ataxia
Vertebral artery 
Risks: Trauma or spinal 
MRA or angiogram
dissection
manipulation 
Other symptoms:
Severe headache or 
neck pain at onset,
progressive neurologic 
deficit with cranial 
neuropathies, ataxia,
weakness
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Multiple sclerosis
CNS lesions developing 
Brain MRI
at different times and 
Oligoclonal bands 
places: prior episodes of
in cerebrospinal 
visual loss (optic neuritis),
fluid
weakness, diplopia
222 /  CHAPTER 13
G. Vertigo is the presenting symptom in 5% of patients with MS
and is reported in 30-50% of patients with MS; it is com-
monly associated with other cranial nerve dysfunction.
H. Other common symptoms include a variety of sensory symp-
toms, urinary incontinence, heat sensitivity, fatigue, depres-
sion, and cognitive dysfunction.
I. Prognosis at 10 years 
1. 50% of patients require a cane 
2. 15% of patients are wheelchair-dependent
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is primarily clinical, resting on the demonstration
of ≥2 attacks separated in space and time. In patients with
CIS, several tests results increase the likelihood that the
patient will progress to MS. These include multiple white
matter lesions on MRI or cerebrospinal fluid analysis that
demonstrates oligoclonal bands. The exact sensitivity and
specificity varies dependent on whether the patient has a
CIS or multiple symptoms, the duration of follow-up and the
criteria of a positive result. The Poser and McDonald criteria
incorporate clinical data with results from MRI, cerebrospinal
fluid analysis, and evoked responses.
B. Brain MRI test of choice
1. Demonstrates periventricular white matter lesions (lesions
may also be seen in other white matter locations). 
2. Sensitivity ≈81–90%, specificity 71–96%. 
3. Gadolinium enhancement suggests active plaques. 
4. Ischemia, systemic lupus erythematosus, Behçet syn-
drome, syphilis, HIV, sarcoidosis, and other vasculitides
may look similar to MS on MRI.
C. Spinal MRI has similar sensitivity (75-83%) to brain MRI
but is more specific (97%) than brain MRI.
D. Evoked potentials
1. Visual evoked potentials are 65–85% sensitive but not
specific for MS.
2. Somatosensory evoked potentials
a. 69–77% sensitive
b. Abnormal in 50% of patients with MS without sensory
signs or symptoms
E. Cerebrospinal fluid can be useful in patients in whom the
diagnosis is uncertain
1. Cell counts are usually normal.
2. Immunoglobulin (oligoclonal bands) may be elevated.
a. Elevated in 60–70% of patients with CIS and 85–95%
of patients with MS; 92% specific 
b. LR+, 11.3; LR−0.11
c. 25% of patients with oligoclonal bands and 1 event
progressed to MS, compared with 9% without bands
(at 3 years)
F. Differential diagnosis includes other inflammatory CNS diseases
ie, acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, transverse myelitis,
CNS vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, syphilis, HIV,
human T lymphotrophic virus type I, neurosarcoidosis, cere-
brovascular disease, antiphospholipid syndromes, Lyme disease,
and migraine. 
G. Clues to alternative etiology include 
1. Single CNS lesion
2. Unusual age of presentation
3. Spinal lesion in absence of intracranial disease 
Treatment
A. Corticosteroids are recommended for acute attacks with dis-
tressing symptoms or disability and have been demonstrated
to be superior to placebo in hastening relapse recovery. For
optic neuritis, IV methylprednisolone is preferred to oral therapy.
B. Disease modifying agents can slow the rate of progression and
relapse in relapse-remitting MS and CIS suggestive of MS. 
1. First-line agents include interferons and glatiramer. 
a. Side effects of interferons include flu-like symptoms,
increase in liver function tests (LFTs), and the devel-
opment of neutralizing antibodies.
b. LFT abnormalities are common, but serious hepato-
toxicity is rare. 
2. Mitoxantrone is also used.
C. Anti-integrin antibodies (natalizumab) may also be useful in
the therapy of MS but can be complicated by progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy.
D. Neuropathic pain can be treated with gabapentin, carba-
mazepine, and valproic acid.
E. Bone mineral density should be monitored in patients with
diminished activity and in those requiring corticosteroids.
F. Specialty consultation is advised.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mr. D’s MRI reveals multiple periventricular and brainstem
white matter lesions strongly suggestive of MS. A lum-
bar puncture is performed and positive for oligoclonal
bands. Although the patient has suffered from only 1 clin-
ical event, you are reasonably confident that he has MS.
Mr. D refuses initial therapy. He returns 6 months later
with monocular visual loss and eye pain. A diagnosis of
optic neuritis is made. This confirms the diagnosis of MS.
Mr. D agrees to see a neurologist who initiates interferon
therapy. One year later, he is doing well, without any new
or persistent symptoms.
DIZZINESS /  223
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mrs. P is an 85-year-old woman with diabetes who com-
plains of dizziness. She reports that she has noticed
dizziness for several years but that her symptoms seem
to be progressing.
When asked to describe her symptoms in more detail,
she reports that she feels (and worries) that she might
fall. She reports no rotational or spinning sensation. She
also reports no history of near or actual fainting. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. P is complaining of dysequilibrium. Dysequilibrium can arise
from abnormalities of the brain, cerebellum, spinal cord, or periph-
eral nerves. Possible causes include Parkinson disease, normal-
pressure hydrocephalus, cerebellar degeneration (ie, from alcohol),
cerebellar stroke, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, B12 deficiency, tabes
dorsalis, and multiple sensory deficits. Finally, a multitude of drugs
can cause dysequilibrium including benzodiazepines, tricyclic antide-
pressants, alcohol, and aminoglycosides. The neurologic exam is piv-
otal in such patients. The cranial nerve exam, gait, and sensory exams
may provide critical clues to the diagnosis. Gait disturbances may
suggest Parkinson disease (shuffling gait) or cerebellar disease (wide-
based gait). Stocking glove sensory deficits are typical of diabetic neu-
ropathy, whereas loss of proprioception suggests posterior column
disease (ie, B12 deficiency, tabes dorsalis, and some compressive spinal
lesions) (A diagnostic approach is illustrated in Figure 13–4).
3
Mrs. P reports that her symptoms occur almost exclu-
sively when she gets up from her bed during the night to 
go to the bathroom. She has stumbled twice but has
never fallen. She reports a long history of cataracts (but
has declined surgery). In addition, she has experienced
tingling and numbness in her hands and feet for several
years. She reports a history of hypertension but no
known stroke. She fervently denies any history of sexually
transmitted disease and was monogamous with her hus-
band. She drinks alcohol rarely. Her medications include
hydrochlorothiazide, metformin, triazolam (for sleep),
and aspirin. On physical exam, her BP while sitting is
142/70 mm Hg and pulse is 76 bpm; while standing, her
BP is 125/55 mm Hg and pulse is 82 bpm. She has bilat-
erally dense cataracts. Neurologic exam reveals decreased
sensation to the monofilament in a stocking glove distri-
bution. She has no resting or intention tremor. Her face
is quite expressive. Gait is hesitant but not wide based.
She is unsteady during Romberg testing. Finger-to-nose
testing is normal. Cranial nerves are intact.
The pivotal features of Mrs. P’s history and physical are her stock-
ing glove neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, cataracts, and nocturnal
pattern of symptoms (when the room is dark). In combination,
these features suggest multiple sensory deficits, which should be
the leading diagnosis. Active alternatives include medications, in
particular the triazolam. The history of diabetes mellitus and
hypertension increase the possibility of cerebellar stroke, and verte-
brobasilar insufficiency (VBI) although her neurologic exam does
not suggest this or Parkinson disease. Since treatment is available
for B12 deficiency and tabes dorsalis, they are “must not miss” pos-
sibilities. The differential diagnosis is summarized in Table 13–5.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Multiple Sensory Deficits
Textbook Presentation 
The typical patient is an elderly diabetic who complains of symp-
toms when arising from their bed during the night. Patients may
fall or simply feel as though they are going to fall. Multiple sensory
History: Medications, diabetes mellitus
Neuroexam: Gait, sensation, Romberg, tremor, vision, cranial nerves
Lab: Check B12 levels and FTA-ab
Normal gait
Abnormal gait
Cranial neuropathy
Consider: multiple
sensory deficits
MRI
Shuffling gait: Consider Parkinson disease
Wide-based gait: Consider cerebellar disease
Figure 13–4. Diagnostic approach: dysequilibrium.
224 /  CHAPTER 13
losses and physical deconditioning create imbalance and an unsteady
gait. Orthostatic hypotension (aggravated by many medications) and
benzodiazepines for sleep may contribute to the symptoms.
Disease Highlights 
A. Multiple systems are involved. 
B. Typically, at least 2 or more of the following are present:
1. Visual loss (secondary to myopia, presbyopia, cataracts,
macular degeneration)
2. Proprioceptive loss (neuropathy from diabetes, myelopathy
from cervical spondylosis)
3. Chronic bilateral vestibular damage (from ototoxic drugs)
4. Orthopedic disorder impairing ambulation
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Ataxia is uncommon (0/14 in one series).
B. Patients with significant ataxia or cerebellar findings should
undergo MRI to exclude alternative diagnoses.
Treatment
A multifaceted approach is often necessary; elements include:
A. Visual correction
B. Night lighting
C. Instructing patients to sit at the edge of the bed prior to standing
D. Modifying medications to minimize orthostatic hypotension
(ie, α-blockers, diuretics)
E. When possible, eliminate benzodiazepines, neuroleptics, and
any unnecessary medications.
F. Home visits can identify fall risks (electric and telephone
cords, loose rugs, etc).
G. Lower limb strength training and balance training have been
demonstrated to reduce falls.
H. Bisphosphonates reduce the risk of fractures in patients with
osteoporosis.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
Obtaining CNS imaging is often a matter of judgment in
patients with dysequilibrium. Definite indications for MRI
include cerebellar signs on physical exam (ataxia), cranial
neuropathies, or history of cerebrovascular accident. Possi-
ble indications for CNS imaging include multiple risk factors
for cerebrovascular disease. Given the Mrs. P’s age, you
remain concerned about cerebrovascular disease, in partic-
ular cerebellar stroke and vertebrobasilar insufficiency.
Alternative Diagnosis: Cerebrovascular
Disease 
Textbook Presentation 
Cerebrovascular disease encompasses a multitude of diseases in
which disordered blood supply results in CNS dysfunction. The
neurologic symptoms may be transient (typically <1 h) if blood
supply is reestablished quickly (transient ischemic attack [TIA]) or
permanent if blood flow is not reestablished within this period
(stroke). Patients with symptoms lasting > 1 hour but < 24 hours
often have subclinical infarction. The location of ischemia within
the brain and the mechanism of the event determine the type of
symptoms, their rapidity of onset, and severity. 
Disease Highlights
A. Thrombosis 
1. Large intracranial or extracranial vessels (ie, middle cerebral
artery, carotid artery, vertebral artery)
Table 13–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. P.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Multiple sensory 
Symptoms occur in 
Careful neurologic 
deficits
dark environment 
exam
Visual impairment 
(cataracts) 
Peripheral neuropathy
Diabetes
Orthopedic disorder
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Medications
Benzodiazepines
Discontinue 
Tricyclic antidepressants
medication
Aminoglycosides
Cerebellar 
Risks: Hypertension,
MRI/MRA
stroke
diabetes mellitus,
Transcranial 
peripheral vascular 
Doppler
disease, coronary 
angiogram
artery disease, tobacco 
use, older age, atrial 
fibrillation, valvular 
heart disease
CNS signs: Ataxia,
dysmetria
Vertebrobasilar 
Risks: Hypertension,
MRI/MRA
insufficiency
diabetes mellitus,
CTA
peripheral vascular 
Transcranial 
disease, coronary 
Doppler
artery disease,
angiogram
tobacco use, older 
age, atrial fibrillation,
valvular heart disease
CNS signs or symptoms:
diplopia, dysarthria,
weakness, ataxia 
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
B12 deficiency
Megaloblastic anemia
See Chapter 6,
Pancytopenia
Anemia
Vibratory and positional 
Vitamin B12 level
sensory deficits 
MMA level 
Tabes dorsalis
Vibratory and position 
FTA antibody
sensory deficits
History of primary 
syphilis (painless single 
ulcerated papule) 
secondary syphilis 
(rash involving palms 
and soles) 
MMA = methylmalonic acid
DIZZINESS /  225
a. Risk factors include older age, hypertension, tobacco
use, and diabetes.
b. Occasionally, secondary to hypercoagulable states,
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, vasculitis (ie,
Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis), or sickle cell anemia
2. Small penetrating vessels: Small arteries that penetrate at
right angles may be obstructed, resulting in small cavitary
infarcts (lacunar infarcts—see below); usually involve basal
ganglia, internal capsule, thalamus and pons.
3. May progress in stuttering manner 
4. Unusual in patients younger than age 40 
5. Headache unusual at onset of symptoms (< 20%)
B. Embolization 
1. Sources include left atrium (particularly in patients with
atrial fibrillation), left ventricle (myocardial infarction,
heart failure), heart valves, aortic arch, and carotid or ver-
tebral arteries.
2. Symptoms are maximal at onset and may involve multiple
vascular territories.
C. Hemorrhage (≈20%)
1. Intraparenchymal 
a. Usually secondary to hypertension
b. Other causes include trauma, amyloid angiopathy, bleed-
ing diathesis (warfarin), vascular malformations or cocaine
or methamphetamine use. (Cocaine may be associated
with spasm and thrombosis or intracranial hemorrhage.)
c. Neurologic symptoms and headache progress over
minutes to hours.
d. Headache is present at the onset of symptoms in
50–60% of cases.
e. Focal deficits common
2. Subarachnoid: (See Chapter 18, Headache)
D. Dissection of the carotid or vertebral arteries can cause
ischemia due to thrombosis, embolization, or hemorrhage.
E. Hypotension may result in symmetric damage to watershed
areas including occipital cortex (resulting in blindness), motor
strips (resulting in shoulder and hip weakness).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Initial evaluation should include serum glucose, CBC, pro-
thrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, basic metabolic
panel, an ECG (to look for atrial fibrillation or myocardial
infarction), and neuroimaging.
B. Neuroimaging: MRI is far superior to CT scan for the diag-
nosis of ischemic stroke and almost identical for the diagnosis
of hemorrhagic stroke (Table 13–6). The remainder of the 
discussion will focus on the subset of cerebrovascular disorders
(ie, VBI [thrombosis of the large basilar or vertebral arteries]
and cerebellar infarction) that frequently involve the brainstem
and cerebellum and may result in vertigo or imbalance. 
1.Vertebrobasilar Insufficiency (VBI)
Textbook Presentation 
The classic presentation of VBI is an elderly patient with diabetes,
hypertension, or both who complains of intermittent spells of ver-
tigo associated with other neurologic symptoms, such as diplopia,
dysphagia, dysarthria, weakness, or ataxia. 
Disease Highlights 
A. Risk factors include diabetes, hypertension, increased age,
coronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease, tobacco
use, and male sex.
B. Thrombosis and embolism (cardiac or artery to artery) are the
most common causes.
C. Dizziness in patients with VBI may be described as tilting
rather than spinning.
D. Symptoms usually last for minutes with VBI (but may persist
in patients with stroke or cerebellar hemorrhage).
E. Basilar artery infarctions may result in cranial neuropathies,
hemiparesis, and coma.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. 50% of patients have a normal neurologic exam between the
episodes.
B. In most patients with VBI and vertigo, other CNS symptoms
or signs (diplopia, ataxia, dysarthria, Horner syndrome,
weakness, or crossed face and body numbness) are also pres-
ent. However, in 7.5–20% of patients with VBI, isolated
intermittent vertigo presents as the sole manifestation of
basilar ischemia, which can be a harbinger of frank brainstem
infarction. 
Basilar ischemia should be considered in patients
with vertigo that is not clearly positional and who
have significant cerebrovascular disease risk factors
(ie, diabetes).
C. Most common symptom is visual dysfunction (eg, diplopia,
visual field defects, hallucinations, and blindness). 
D. Transcranial Doppler, MRA, CT angiography (CTA), and
angiography have been used. 
Table 13–6. Sensitivity for diagnosis of acute stroke.
All 
Ischemic 
Hemorrhagic 
Ischemic 
Strokes
Strokes
Strokes
Strokes < 3 h
CT (noncontrast)
26%
16%
93%
12%
MRI
83%
83%
85%
73%
226 /  CHAPTER 13
1. MRI with MRA is procedure of choice. 
a. Noninvasive
b. 95-97% sensitive and 99% specific for posterior 
circulation disorders 
2. CTA can be used in patients with contraindications to
MRI/MRA (ie, pacemakers).
3. Transcranial Doppler may be useful but is operator
dependent. 
4. Angiography is invasive, but it is the gold standard.
5. Echocardiography is used in patients with suspected
embolic disease, particularly those without evidence of
basilar or vertebral artery disease on neuroimaging and in
those with infarcts in multiple vascular territories.
Treatment
A. The treatment of patients with acute posterior circulation
strokes is complex. If patients can be evaluated (including
neuroimaging to exclude hemorrhage) and treated within
3 hours of symptom onset, options include intravenous tissue
plasminogen activator (t-PA) and intra-arterial thrombolytic
agents. Guidelines for the use of rt-PA in stroke patients have
been published and must be followed carefully to avoid intracra-
nial hemorrhage.
B. For secondary prevention, aspirin, clopidogrel, aspirin plus
dipyridamole, and warfarin have been used. 
1. Warfarin is preferred for patients with stroke and atrial
fibrillation.
2. Some clinicians use warfarin for significant vertebral or
basilar artery stenosis.
3. Ticlopidine is a second-line drug due to the risk of hema-
tologic toxicity. 
4. Angioplasty, stenting, and surgical reconstruction have been
used in patients with vertebral artery and basilar artery
stenosis who remain symptomatic despite medical therapy.
5. Statin therapy is also recommended for patients with cere-
brovascular atherosclerotic disease and low-density
lipoprotein cholesterol levels > 70 mg/dL.
C. Modify risk factors
2.Lacunar Infarction of the Pons or Cerebellum
Textbook Presentation 
Typically, the presenting symptoms are rapid onset of hemiparesis,
sensory symptoms, or ataxia. 
Disease Highlights
A. Small, deep, non-cortical white matter infarcts secondary to
obstruction of the small penetrating arteries
B. Typically involves basal ganglia, internal capsule, thalamus,
and pons
C. Cortical signs (aphasia, agnosia, apraxia and hemianopsia) are
absent.
D. Symptoms depend on stroke location (Table 13–7).
E. Common causes of lacunar infarcts 
1. Hyalinosis of the small penetrating artery with subsequent
thrombosis is the most common cause. The hyalinosis is a
long-term complication of hypertension. 
2. The small penetrating arteries may also be obstructed by
thrombosis or embolization arising from the parent artery
(middle cerebral artery or basilar artery), which feeds the
small penetrating artery. The recurrence rate in patients
with parent arterial lesions is much higher than in
patients without such lesions (16% vs 1%) and similar to
patients with large artery infarcts (17%).
3. Cardioembolism
F. Hypertension, diabetes, and smoking are risk factors.
G. Incidence in the black population is approximately twice that
in the white population.
H. Vertigo in brainstem and cerebellar lacunar infarctions 
1. 48% of such infarctions were attributed to hypertension,
40% cardioembolic
2. Concomitant cranial nerve findings and pronounced ataxia
are common. However, 10% of cerebellar infarctions pres-
ent without other cranial nerve findings and present similar
to patients with vestibular neuritis with isolated, sponta-
neous, prolonged vertigo; nystagmus; and imbalance. Find-
ings that suggest cerebellar infarction include significant
imbalance or skew deviation:
a. However, 29% of patients with cerebellar infarctions
have imbalance mild enough that they maintain the
ability to independently ambulate.
b. Skew deviation suggests cerebellar infarction but is only
39% sensitive (100% specific); LR+ ∞, LR– 0.6
c. The presence of any of the following features in a patient
with persistent vertigo suggests that a patient may have
cerebellar infarction and warrants an MRI/MRA:
(1) Headache 
(2) Weakness 
Table 13–7. Lacunar strokes: Location and associated symptoms.
Name
Location
Typical Symptoms
Pure motor stroke 
Internal capsule, pons
Unilateral weakness, involves face,
arm and leg without cortical findings
Pure sensory stroke
Thalamus
Unilateral sensory loss without 
cortical findings
Ataxia-hemiparesis
Pons
Ipsilateral weakness and limb ataxia,
nystagmus and dysarthria may be seen
Dysarthria and clumsy 
Pons or internal capsule
Facial weakness, dysarthria and 
hand syndrome
slight hand weakness
DIZZINESS /  227
(3) Dysmetria 
(4) Inability to ambulate 
(5) Cranial nerve findings 
(6) Skew deviation 
(7) Nystagmus that is not suppressed by visual fixation 
(8) Risk factors for vascular disease
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The sensitivity of the CT scan is low, at most 30-44%
B. MRI scan is 86% sensitive. 
C. MRA is unable to visualize small vessel occlusion but can be
useful to exclude occlusion of large feeding vessel and may be
particularly useful in patients without typical risk factors for
lacunar infarction.
D. Other tests may be useful 
1. Echocardiogram (to look for embolic etiology) 
2. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (elevated in certain 
vasculitides). 
Treatment
A. Antihypertensive therapy reduces stroke 35-40%. 
B. Recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA)
improves outcomes in carefully selected stroke patients only if
given within 3 hours of symptom onset. Guidelines for the use of
rt-PA have been published and must be followed carefully to
avoid intracranial hemorrhage.
C. Secondary prevention with aspirin or other antiplatelet med-
ication is recommended.
D. Risk factor management (control of diabetes mellitus, hyper-
tension, dyslipidemia and smoking cessation) 
3
The patient’s symptoms of imbalance, occurring in the
dark, and absence of vertigo or other neurologic symp-
toms is more consistent with multiple sensory deficits
than with either VBI or cerebellar stroke. Nonetheless,
given her age, an MRI is reasonable and reveals mild atro-
phy, appropriate to age without discrete evidence of prior
infarction. Vitamin B12 levels are normal and FTA-antibody
testing for syphilis is negative.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mrs. P’s normal MRI effectively rules out cerebellar stroke
as a cause of her dysequilibrium. She has no findings
that suggest Parkinson disease (shuffling gait; resting,
pill rolling tremor; bradykinesia; or masked facies) and her
normal B12 level and FTA-antibody exclude the diagnoses
of B12 deficiency and tabes dorsalis, respectively. You
conclude that the dysequilibrium is caused by multiple
sensory deficits. 
Mrs. P’s hydrochlorothiazide is reduced by half. In
addition, the triazolam is discontinued, and she reluc-
tantly agrees to cataract surgery. A home visit reveals
multiple risk factors for falls (including loose rugs), which
are removed. Nightlights are installed. One year later
Mrs. P reports that she remains unsteady on standing
but has not fallen or sustained a hip fracture.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Nonspecific Dizziness
Textbook Presentation
Patients with a variety of psychiatric disorders including panic dis-
order, generalized anxiety disorder, depression, and somatization
disorder may complain of ill-defined dizziness. The dizziness is
often of long duration (years) and poorly defined. Patients may
complain of fogginess, feeling woozy, mental fuzziness, loss of
energy, or a wobbly or a floating sensation. Patients may complain
of other associated symptoms particularly if they have panic
attacks including chest pain, shortness of breath, perioral pares-
thesias, tingling in the hands and feet, and lightheadedness.
Disease Highlights
A. 20-38% of patients attending a specialty dizzy clinic demon-
strated panic disorder. 
B. Psychiatric symptoms may develop without any identifiable
organic cause or develop after episodes of true vertigo or
syncope.
C. Symptoms are, in part, secondary to hyperventilation, which
leads to hypocapnia resulting in decreased cerebral blood flow.
D. Patients may complain of lightheadedness or near syncope.
E. Depression is reviewed in Chapter 27, Involuntary Weight Loss
F. Milder variants of somatization disorder are more common
than the full-blown entity. Such variants may be precipitated
by stress or minor physiologic disturbances. Paradoxically,
such patients are often disturbed by negative test results rather
than reassured. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Continuous sensation of vertigo > 1-2 weeks without daily varia-
tion is likely psychogenic. This is to be distinguished from inter-
mittent vertigo, recurring for weeks, precipitated by motion. 
B. One study reported 62% of patients with hyperventilation
had other significant psychiatric disorders.
C. Symptom reproduction by induced hyperventilation is non-
specific. 
D. Care must be taken before ascribing dizziness to a psychiatric
etiology.
1. Multiple studies have demonstrated a high prevalence of
anxiety (22-67%) among patients with well-defined
organic etiologies of their dizziness.
2. Anxiety scores were as high in patients with acute
labyrinthine failure and vestibular dysfunction as among
patients with no vestibular diagnosis. 
3. This suggests that dizziness from an organic etiology leads
to significant psychiatric distress in many patients and that
228 /  CHAPTER 13
the psychiatric symptoms may be sequelae of the dizziness
rather than the cause of the dizziness.
4. A fear response, symptom focus or abnormal mood that
progresses to panic disorders, somatization disorders, or
major depression may develop.
E. In some patients, an initial episode of vertigo or near syncope
precipitates intense fear, which magnifies normal physiologic
sensations. The history should review the first episode when-
ever possible. 
F. Certain physical findings suggest a psychogenic disturbance.
1. Moment-to-moment fluctuations in impairment 
2. Excessive slowness or hesitation 
3. Exaggerated sway on Romberg, improved by distraction 
4. Sudden buckling of knee, typically without falling 
5. A cautious “walking on ice” pattern 
Treatment
A. Appropriate evaluation considers organic etiologies and eval-
uates appropriate possibilities.
B. Discuss patient’s concerns and fears about the diagnosis.
C. Educate patient not to overly restrict physical activities since
this impairs CNS compensation and may worsen the physical
symptoms.
D. For patients with hyperventilation, breathing in and out of paper
bag, increases inspired PaCO2, and thereby arterial PaCO2. This
increases cerebral blood flow and improves symptoms. 
E. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and benzodi-
azepines are used in patients with panic attacks and anxiety
disorders. SSRIs are preferred due to potential problems with
benzodiazepines (eg, dependence, tolerance, exacerbation of
symptoms on discontinuation, sedation, interference with
cognition in the elderly, and exacerbation of depression).
F. Cognitive and behavioral therapy have also been effective.
REFERENCES
Balcer LJ. Clinical practice. Optic neuritis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354(12):1273–80.
Broderick J, Connolly S, Feldmann E et al. Guidelines for the management of
spontaneous intracerebral hemorrhage in adults: 2007 update: a guideline
from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association Stroke
Council, High Blood Pressure Research Council, and the Quality of Care
and Outcomes in Research Interdisciplinary Working Group. Stroke.
2007;38(6):2001–23.
Chalela JA, Kidwell CS, Nentwich LM et al. Magnetic resonance imaging and
computed tomography in emergency assessment of patients with suspected
acute stroke: a prospective comparison. Lancet. 2007;369(9558):293–8.
Cnyrim CD, Newman-Toker D, Karch C, Brandt T, Strupp M. Bedside differen-
tiation of vestibular neuritis from central “vestibular pseudoneuritis.” J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79(4):458–60.
Furman JM, Cass SP. Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. N Engl J Med.
1999;341(21):1590–6.
Gomez CR, Cruz-Flores S, Malkoff MD, Sauer CM, Burch CM. Isolated vertigo
as a manifestation of vertebrobasilar ischemia. Neurology. 1996;47(1):94–7.
Lee H, Sohn SI, Cho YW et al. Cerebellar infarction presenting isolated vertigo:
frequency and vascular topographical patterns. Neurology. 2006;67(7):
1178–83.
Neuhauser H, Leopold M, von Brevern M, Arnold G, Lempert T. The interrela-
tions of migraine, vertigo, and migrainous vertigo. Neurology.
2001;56(4):436–41.
Rajajee V, Kidwell C, Starkman S et al. Diagnosis of lacunar infarcts within 6 hours
of onset by clinical and CT criteria versus MRI. J Neuroimaging. 2008;18(1):
66–72.
Thacker EL, Mirzaei F, Ascherio A. Infectious mononucleosis and risk for multi-
ple sclerosis: a meta-analysis. Ann Neurol. 2006;59(3):499–503.
van der Worp HB, van Gijn J. Clinical practice. Acute ischemic stroke. New England
Journal of Medicine 2007;357(6):572–9.
?
14
229
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. C is a 64-year-old man who comes to see you com-
plaining of shortness of breath.
What is the differential diagnosis of dysp-
nea? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Heart disease, lung disease, and anemia are the most common
causes of dyspnea. The simplest approach to the differential diag-
nosis is to consider the anatomical components of each of these
systems. This in turn allows us to deduce a fairly comprehensive
differential diagnosis of dyspnea. (Occasionally, neuromuscular
disease and anxiety also cause dyspnea.)
Differential Diagnosis of Dyspnea
A. Heart
1. Endocardium: Valvular heart disease (ie, aortic stenosis
[AS], aortic regurgitation [AR], mitral regurgitation [MR],
and mitral stenosis)
2. Conduction system
a. Bradycardia (sick sinus syndrome, atrioventricular
block)
b. Tachycardia 
(1) Atrial fibrillation and other supraventricular
tachycardias (SVTs) 
(2) Ventricular tachycardia
3. Myocardium: Heart failure (HF) 
a. Systolic failure (coronary artery disease [CAD], hyper-
tension, alcohol abuse)
b. Diastolic failure (hypertension, AS, hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy)
4. Coronary arteries (ischemia)
5. Pericardium (tamponade, constrictive pericarditis)
B. Lung
1. Alveoli
a. Pulmonary edema (HF or acute respiratory distress
syndrome)
b. Pneumonia
2. Airways
a. Suprathoracic airways (ie, laryngeal edema)
b. Intrathoracic airways 
(1) Asthma
(2) Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
(see Chapter 28, Wheezing and Stridor)
3. Blood vessels
a. Pulmonary emboli
b. Primary pulmonary hypertension
4. Pleural
a. Pneumothorax
b. Pleural effusions
(1) Transudative 
(a) HF
(b) Cirrhosis
(c) Nephrotic syndrome
(d) Pulmonary embolism (PE)
(2) Exudative 
(a) Tuberculosis
(b) Cancer
(c) Parapneumonic effusions
(d) Connective tissue diseases
(e) PE
5. Interstitium
a. Edema
b. Inflammatory
(1) Organic exposures (eg, hay, cotton, grain)
(2) Mineral exposures (eg, asbestos, silicon, coal)
(3) Idiopathic diseases (eg, sarcoidosis, scleroderma, sys-
temic lupus erythematosus, Wegener granulomatosis)
c. Infectious
C. Anemia 
Despite this long list, certain symptoms, signs, and historical fea-
tures can give pivotal clues to the diagnosis. Features that suggest
HF include a history of myocardial infarction, CAD risk factors,
long-standing hypertension, or alcohol abuse. Further, an S3 gal-
lop or jugular venous distention (JVD) are fingerprints for HF.
Pulmonary embolism can be obvious or subtle and should be con-
sidered in patients taking exogenous estrogen and those with a his-
tory of cancer, recent immobilization, surgery, or leg swelling. A
significant smoking history (≥20 pack years) raises the possibility
of COPD. Wheezing—defined as a high-pitched sound on
exhalation—suggests COPD or asthma, whereas stridor—defined
I have a patient with dyspnea.
How do I determine the cause?
as a high-pitched sound on inspiration—suggests upper airway
obstruction. Menorrhagia or melena suggests anemia for which
pale conjunctiva is virtually diagnostic. Fever and cough raise the
possibility of pneumonia.
Certain tests are key in the evaluation of the patients with dys-
pnea. A chest radiograph, ECG and Hct are mandatory in the ini-
tial evaluation. In addition, echocardiography can reveal unsus-
pected HF or valvular heart disease. Pulmonary function tests can
help determine whether the patient has obstructive, restrictive, or
vascular lung disease (Table 14–1). Obstructive lung disease is
characterized by decreased flows (forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) and the fraction of expired air in the first second
(FEV1/FVC or [FEV1%]), restriction by decrease volumes (total
lung capacity [TLC]) and pulmonary vascular disease by decreased
diffusing capacity of lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Figure 14–1
summarizes the approach to the patient with dyspnea.  
1
Over the last 2 years, Mr. C has noticed worsening dysp-
nea on exertion. He complains of shortness of breath
with minimal exertion. He is unable to walk around his 
house without resting. Several years ago, Mr. C could walk
several blocks without any difficulty. He notes that he is
unable to sleep lying flat due to shortness of breath
(orthopnea), and he sleeps on a recliner for the last
6 months. Occasionally, he awakes from sleep acutely
short of breath (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea). He
complains that his feet are swollen. 
Always quantify the increase in dyspnea from base-
line. Significant changes suggest serious disease and
warrant thorough evaluations.
1
Past medical history is notable for a myocardial infarc-
tion 2 years ago. Vital signs are temperature, 37.0°C; RR,
24 breaths per minute; pulse, 110 bpm; BP, 120/78 mm
Hg. His pulse is regular with an occasional irregularity.
Cardiac exam reveals JVD to the angle of the jaw in the
upright position, a grade II/VI systolic murmur at the
apex, and a positive S3 gallop. Lung exam reveals crackles
half of the way up from the bases bilaterally. He has 2+
pretibial edema to the knees.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Although the differential diagnosis of dyspnea is broad, the patient
has numerous signs and symptoms that point to a cardiac etiology.
The JVD, S3 gallop, and peripheral edema are all consistent with
cardiac disease. The leading hypothesis with these signs and symp-
toms is HF secondary to his previous myocardial infarction. Alter-
native diagnoses include valvular heart disease (ie, MR, AS, or
AR). This particular murmur is most consistent with MR. Mr. C’s
irregular pulse also raises the possibility of atrial fibrillation (AF).
Finally, cardiac ischemia presenting as dyspnea rather than pain is
a must not miss possibility. Table 14–2 lists the differential
diagnosis.
Pursue highly specific positive physical findings (in
this case the S3 gallop and JVD); they should help
drive the diagnostic search. 
1
A chest radiograph, Hct, and ECG are performed.  
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis of HF? If not, what other infor-
mation do you need?
230 /  CHAPTER 14
Table 14–1. Pulmonary function tests abnormalities in
lung disease.
Other PFT 
Mechanism
Key PFT Abnormality
Findings
Obstruction
↓Flows
TLC N/↑
(all types)
↓FEV1/FVC
RV ↑
COPD (chronic
As above
bronchitis)
COPD
As above
DLCO ↓
(emphysema)
Asthma
Above and
Bronchodilator produce
an increase of ≥12% ↑
Methacholine produces
a decrease of ≥20% ↓
Restriction
Volumes ↓,TLC ↓
(all types)
Interstitium 
RV ↓
(eg, pulmonary
As above
DLCO ↓
fibrosis)
FEV1% N/↑
Chest wall
DLCO WNL
(eg, pleural
As above
RV N
effusion, obesity)
FEV1% N
Neuromuscular
As above
RV ↑,MVV ↓,
(eg,myasthenia)
NIF ↓,PIF ↓
Vascular (ie,
DLCO ↓
Other PFTs 
pulmonary
often nl
embolism)
DLCO,diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide;FEV1,forced expiratory volume in
1 second; FVC, forced vital capacity; MVV, maximal minute ventilation; NIF, neg-
ative inspiratory force; PIF, positive inspiratory force; RV, residual volume;TLC,
total lung capacity.
DYSPNEA /  231
Leading Hypothesis: HF 
Textbook Presentation 
Patients typically have fatigue, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, parox-
ysmal nocturnal dyspnea, and edema. Often, there is an antecedent his-
tory of either myocardial infarction or poorly controlled hypertension.  
Disease Highlights 
A. Strictly speaking, HF refers to any cardiac pathology that
impairs left ventricular filling or ejection, which may arise
from disease of the pericardium, myocardium, or valves. The
remainder of this discussion will focus on myocardial causes
of HF. Valvular heart disease is discussed separately.
History and physical exam: Quantify magnitude of change, time course, associated symptoms. Search for clues!
Baseline evaluation: Chest radiograph, ECG, and Hct
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Valvular heart
disease
Arrhythmia
Heart failure
Acute coronary
syndrome
Cardiac Etiologies
Pulmonary Etiologies
COPD
Asthma
Cold ± exercise →
symptoms; +FH
Wheezing
PFTs,
bronchodilator
response,
methacholine
induced
Pulmonary
embolism
Sudden onset of
dyspnea, pleuritic
chest pain, cancer,
surgery
immobilization,
estrogen therapy
Unilateral
leg swelling
Pneumonia
(CAP, TB, PCP)
Fever, productive
cough, high-risk
sexual exposures,
injection drug use
Crackles, fever
thrush,
Kaposi sarcoma,
skin pop marks
Chest radiography
HIV, CD4 (when
appropriate)
ILD
Known connective
tissue disease,
Raynaud phenomenon,
vocational,
occupational
exposure
Diffuse lung
crackles
PFTs,
High resolution chest
CT
Anemia
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide; CAD, coronary artery disease; CAP, community-acquired pneumonia;
CTA, CT angiography; FH, family history; ILD, interstitial lung disease; JVD, jugular venous distention;
PCP, Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia; PFTs, pulmonary function tests; PND, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea;
TB, tuberculosis; V/Q, ventilation/perfusion.
Menorrhagia,
melena, rectal
bleeding
Pale
conjunctiva
Hct
> 20 pack years
tobacco
Chest radiography,
PFTs
↓ breath sounds,
wheezing
Chest pain,
CAD risk factors
S3, JVD, crackles on
lung exam
ECG, troponin,
stress test,
angiography
CAD or risk
factors, hypertension,
alcohol abuse, PND
S3, JVD,
crackles on exam
Chest radiography, BNP,
echocardiography
Palpitations
Irregular
pulse
ECG, holter,
event monitor
Rheumatic heart
disease
Echocardiography
Significant
murmur
Clinical Clues
History
Physical
Tests
Supplemental evaluation: Consider echocardiogram, PFTs, CTA
D-dimer
CTA
V/Q scan
Leg duplex
Figure 14–1. Diagnostic approach: dyspnea.
232 /  CHAPTER 14
B. Pathophysiologic classification: HF may be secondary to sys-
tolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction, or both. HF may also
be classified based on whether the primary process affects the
left ventricle (LV) or the right ventricle (RV).
1. Systolic heart failure 
a. Most common pathophysiology underlying HF.  
b. CAD accounts for 66% of all cases of HF.  
c. Other common causes include long-standing hyper-
tension and alcohol abuse.  
d. Less common causes include viral cardiomyopathy,
postpartum cardiomyopathy, drug toxicity (ie, adri-
amycin), and idiopathic cardiomyopathy. 
2. Diastolic heart failure 
a. Diastolic heart failure accounts for 20–60% of all
HF cases.
b. Diastolic dysfunction occurs when LV wall thickness
increases and LV compliance decreases.
c. Decreased LV compliance impairs LV filling and low-
ers cardiac output.
d. Decreased LV compliance also results in increased LV pres-
sure, which is transmitted to the pulmonary capillaries.
e. The increasing pulmonary capillary pressures and
decreased cardiac output cause dyspnea and fatigue. 
f. The mortality in patients with diastolic dysfunction
and systolic dysfunction are similar. 
g. The most common cause of diastolic dysfunction is hyper-
tension. Less common causes include AS and infiltrative
cardiomyopathies (eg, hemochromatosis, amyloidosis).
3. Right- versus left-sided HF 
a. HF may involve the LV, the RV, or both.  
b. Common causes of LV failure include CAD, hyperten-
sion, and alcoholic cardiomyopathy.  
c. Common causes of RV failure include severe pulmonary
disease (especially COPD) and advanced LV failure.  
d. Peripheral edema, JVD, and fatigue may be seen in LV
or RV failure, but pulmonary edema is seen only in LV
failure. 
4. Progression 
a. Heart failure often triggers maladaptive neurohormonal
changes including increased activation of the sympa-
thetic nervous system and the angiotensin system.  
b. These neurohormonal responses promote sodium
retention, increase afterload, and contribute to pro-
gressive HF. 
c. Therapies that interrupt these responses reduce mor-
tality (see below).
C. Functional classification 
1. New York Heart Association: Descriptively useful. May be
limited prognostically by the ability of patients to move
from 1 class to another with therapy.
a. Class I: Asymptomatic
b. Class II: Symptoms on ordinary exertion (ie, climbing
stairs)
c. Class III: Symptoms with less than ordinary exertion
(ie, walking on flat surface)
d. Class IV: Symptoms at rest
2. A more recent classification by the American College of
Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)
recognizes 4 stages (A-D). 
a. Stage A: Patients are at risk for HF. 
b. Stage B: Patients have structural changes (ie, LV hyper-
trophy or decreased ejection fraction [EF]) but no
symptoms. 
c. Stage C: Patients have structural changes and symptoms.
d. Stage D: Patients have structural changes and refrac-
tory symptoms despite therapy.
D. Complications
1. Electrical: Heart block, ventricular tachycardia, AF, sud-
den death
2. Pulmonary edema
3. Stroke and thromboembolism 
a. 2–4% annual incidence  
b. Risk increases if AF coexists
4. MR (LV dilatation may lead to sufficient dilatation of the
mitral annulus that it causes secondary MR [see below])
5. Death
a. Symptomatic mild to moderate HF: 20–30%/y
Table 14–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C.
Diagnostic 
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Heart failure
History of myocardial 
Echocardiogram 
infarction, poorly
ECG
controlled 
BNP 
hypertension 
S3 gallop, JVD 
Crackles on lung exam
Peripheral edema
Active Alternatives-Most Common
Valvular disease
Blowing systolic 
Echocardiogram
Mitral 
murmur at apex 
regurgitation
radiating to axilla
Aortic stenosis
Systolic murmur at
Echocardiogram
right upper sternal
border radiating
to neck
Loss of A2
Aortic
Early diastolic 
Echocardiogram
regurgitation
murmur left 
sternal border
Atrial fibrillation
Irregularly irregular
ECG
pulse
Echocardiogram
Active Alternatives-Must Not Miss 
Angina
Exertional symptoms
ECG
History of CAD or risk
Stress test
factors (diabetes mellitus,
Coronary
male sex, tobacco use,
angiogram
hypertension,
hypercholesterolemia)
DYSPNEA /  233
b. Symptomatic severe HF: up to 50%/y
c. Mechanism of death
(1) Sudden in 50% (secondary to ventricular tachy-
cardia or asystole)
(2) Progressive HF in 50%
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The history should assess risk factors for HF, including hyper-
tension, CAD, alcohol abuse, illicit drug use, and adriamycin
as well as symptoms of HF.
B. Physical exam
1. Clinical signs and symptoms are affected by 
a. Patient’s current volume status 
b. Chronicity. In chronic HF, signs and symptoms are fre-
quently absent despite marked impairment of LV func-
tion and marked volume overload. 
2. S3 gallop
a. An S3 gallop occurs when a large volume of blood
rushes from the left atrium (LA) into the LV at the start
of diastole (just after S2).  
b. Virtually pathognomonic of volume overload and occurs
most commonly in patients with decompensated HF.  
3. S4 gallop 
a. Occurs when the LA contracts and sends blood into
the LV (just before S1).  
b. An S4 gallop may be heard in some normal patients
and in many patients with hypertension and LV
hypertrophy.  
c. S4 is not specific for HF. 
4. JVD 
a. Defined as > 3 cm of elevation above the sternal angle
(Figure 14–2).
b. Highly specific for HF (> 95%); may occur in RV or
LV failure.
5. Table 14–3 summarizes the sensitivities, specificities, and
LRs of clinical findings for HF in patients with dyspnea. 
a. Classic signs and symptoms (orthopnea, paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea, crackles, gallops and edema) are
not sensitive for HF and their absence does not rule
out HF. Indeed, even in severe chronic HF (mean EF
18%, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) >
22 mm Hg), 42% of patients did not have crackles,
increased JVP, or edema.
b. However, certain findings are highly specific and sig-
nificantly increase the likelihood of HF when present.
An S3 (but not an S4) and JVD strongly suggest HF.
c. Other classic symptoms, like orthopnea, PND, and
crackles, are not specific for HF.
C. Chest radiography 
1. Cardiomegaly is the most sensitive finding (74%), and its
absence modestly decreases the likelihood of HF (LR– 0.33). 
2. Pulmonary venous congestion and interstitial edema are
highly specific (96–97%) and when present strongly sug-
gest HF (LR+ 12).
3. Pleural effusions are seen in 26% of patients with HF. 
a. The effusions are usually small to moderate in size and
unilateral or bilateral. 
b. These effusions are transudative. 
c. When due to HF, pleural effusions are usually accom-
panied by cardiomegaly, pulmonary vascular redistrib-
ution, or edema.  
d. The absence of these findings or the presence of mas-
sive pleural effusions suggest some other etiology and
warrants further evaluation.
4. Table 14–4 summarizes the accuracy of the chest radi-
ograph in the diagnosis of HF. 
D. ECG can provide evidence of prior myocardial infarction or
LV hypertrophy. It can neither rule in nor rule out HF.
E. Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP)
1. Secreted by LV or RV in response to increased volume or
pressure or both
Figure 14–2. Measurement of jugular venous distention. (Mod-
ified from McGee S. Evidence Based Physician’s Diagnosis, p.
402. Copyright © 2001. With permission from Elsevier.)
JVD defined > 3 cm
Table 14–3. Accuracy of clinical findings in heart failure.
Finding
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+
LR–
Paroxysmal
41
84
2.6
0.7
nocturnal
dyspnea
Orthopnea
50
77
2.2
0.65
Dyspnea on
84
34
1.3
0.48
exertion
S3
13
99
11
0.88
S4
5
97
1.6
0.98
Jugular
39
92
5.1
0.66
venous
distention 
Crackles
60
78
2.8
0.51
Edema
50
78
2.3
0.64
FP
FP
234 /  CHAPTER 14
2. May be elevated in systolic or diastolic HF 
3. Levels increase proportionately to the degree of HF
4. Low BNP levels decrease the likelihood of HF in patients
with dyspnea. 
a. BNP < 100 pg/mL 
(1) Sensitivity, 87–93%; specificity, 66–72%
(2) LR−, 0.11–0.12; LR+, 2.7–3.1 
b. BNP < 50 pg/mL  
(1) Sensitivity, 97%; specificity, 62% 
(2) LR−, 0.05; LR+, 2.6
c. May not rule out HF in patients with coexistent
COPD
(1) Sensitivity, 35%; specificity, 90% 
(2) LR−, 0.72; LR+, 3.5
5. High levels of BNP increase the likelihood of HF but are
still not entirely specific.
a. BNP ≥250 pg/mL 
(1) Sensitivity, 89%; specificity, 81%  
(2) LR+, 4.6; LR−, 0.14
b. BNP is elevated in patients with right-sided HF (ie,
due to cor pulmonale) and in many patients with PE. 
(1) A significant fraction of patients with PE are clin-
ically stable but found to have RV dilatation on
echocardiography as well as elevated BNP levels. 
(2) The BNP level in patients with stable PE was 88–
487 pg/mL in 34% and 527–1300 pg/mL in 33%.
6. Some authorities use the following criteria to interpret
BNP levels:
a. < 100 pg/mL: HF unlikely
b. 100–500 pg/mL: Indeterminate
c. > 500 pg/mL: (LR+ 6) HF most likely diagnosis
F. Two-dimensional echocardiogram is the test of choice to diag-
nose HF.
1. Systolic and diastolic function can be evaluated.
2. Regional systolic dysfunction suggests an ischemic etiology.
3. Valve function can be assessed.
G. Radionuclide tests can quantify EF but cannot access LV wall
thickness or valvular abnormalities.
H. HF is frequently present but unsuspected in patients in whom
COPD is diagnosed. 
1. Studies report unsuspected HF in ≈25% of patients with
COPD. These patients had fewer pack years of tobacco
use than patients without HF (9.6 vs 22.7). 
2. Pleural fluid, pulmonary revascularization, and edema
were uncommon even in the subgroup with HF (9.1%)
but when present strongly suggested HF (LR+ 9.1). 
Clinicians should have a low threshold for checking
an echocardiogram in patients with COPD and
dyspnea.
Treatment 
A. Prevention: Hypertension therapy decreases the incidence of
HF by 30–50%.
B. Initial laboratory tests: BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, CBC,
TSH, fasting blood glucose or glycohemoglobin, lipid panel,
and liver function tests  
C. Routine chest radiograph, ECG and echocardiogram are
recommended. 
D. Coronary angiography or noninvasive imaging (ie, nuclear
stress test) is recommended in patients with chest pain that
may be cardiac, suspected CAD, or CAD risk factors.
E. Multiple therapies have been demonstrated to reduce mor-
bidity and mortality in patients with systolic dysfunction
and HF.
1. ACE inhibitors 
a. Indicated in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients
with reduced EF
b. Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) may be used in
place of ACE inhibitors when a troublesome cough
develops in patients taking ACE inhibitors.
c. ARBs may cause angioedema in patients who had
angioedema while taking ACE inhibitors.
2. β-Blockers 
a. β-Blockers reduce morbidity and mortality in all stages
of HF, including severe HF (EF < 25%).
b. Indicated in symptomatic and asymptomatic patients
with reduced EF
c. Initiate therapy when patients are euvolemic.
d. β-Blockers can precipitate fatal asthma even in
patients with mild reactive airway disease. Some
authorities advise against their use in any patient with
asthma. 
3. Spironolactone 
a. Reduces mortality in patients with class IV HF and
reduced EF.
b. Contraindications include creatinine > 2.5 mg/dL in
men and > 2.0 mg/dL in women, serum potassium
level > 5.0 mEq/L, or cases in which patients cannot
have their serum potassium adequately monitored.
4. Hydralazine and nitrates, in addition to ACE inhibitors
and β-blockers, have been demonstrated to reduce mor-
tality in black patients with class III or IV HF. They may
also be useful in patients who are unable to tolerate ACE
inhibitors/ARBs.
Table 14–4. Accuracy of chest radiography in heart failure.
Finding
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+
LR–
Pulmonary
54
96
12.0
0.48
venous
congestion
Interstitial
34
97
12.0
0.68
edema
Alveolar
6
99
6
0.95
edema
Pleural
26
92
3.2
0.81
effusions
Cardiomegaly 
74
78
3.3
0.33
DYSPNEA /  235
F. Digoxin 
1. Reduces hospitalizations but not mortality. 
2. Low serum concentrations (0.5–0.8 mg/dL) are as effec-
tive as higher concentrations. 
3. ACC/AHA guidelines recommend digoxin only in symp-
tomatic patients with reduced EF.
4. Digoxin may increase mortality in women and is not
advised for women by some authorities.
G. Diuretics (loop or thiazides) 
1. Mainstay of therapy to treat edema and pulmonary conges-
tion (should be used in combination with salt restriction).  
2. The clinical assessment of volume status is critical.
Increasing weight, edema, JVD, pulmonary edema, or an
S3 gallop suggests patients are volume overloaded.  
3. However, multiple studies demonstrate that patients with
severe chronic HF and marked volume overload (by
PCWP) may have no signs of HF.  
4. Therefore, patients with dyspnea should undergo aggres-
sive diuresis while monitoring renal function. 
H. Control of hypertension
I. Influenza and pneumococcal vaccination
J. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and thiazolidinediones
increase fluid retention and have been associated with wors-
ening HF and precipitating HF and should be avoided. Thi-
azolidinediones are contraindicated in patients with class III
or IV HF.  
K. Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT): Some patients
with HF have prolonged QRS intervals, which reflects pro-
longed and dyssynchronous depolarization. This nonuniform
depolarization results in poorly organized contraction and
contributes to LV dysfunction. In addition, it contributes to
MR and LV remodeling. 
1. In cardiac resynchronization, wires are implanted in the
atria and both ventricles to allow precise and coordinated
depolarization of the atria and left and right ventricles. 
2. CRT improves EF, quality of life, and functional status,
and it reduces hospitalizations and mortality in select
patients. 
3. Indications include patients with class III or IV HF symp-
toms despite optimal medical therapy, an EF < 35%, and
a QRS ≥0.12. 
L. Implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) 
1. A substantial proportion of deaths in patients with HF are
sudden (30% in dilated cardiomyopathy), presumably sec-
ondary to ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation.  
2. ICDs are indicated in select patients with HF, especially in
patients who have survived cardiac arrest and in patients
with unexplained syncope. ICDs are also recommended in
patients without prior syncope or sudden cardiac death
with NYHA class II or III HF and an EF < 35% as well as
in patients with NYHA class I HF if it is ≥40 days after a
myocardial infarction with an EF < 30%.   
M. Heart transplantation is an option for a few patients with
severe HF refractory to intensive medical therapy.
N. Therapy in patients with diastolic HF and normal EF 
1. Systolic and diastolic hypertension should be controlled. 
2. Diuretics can be used to treat pulmonary congestion or
edema.
3. Digoxin has no proven benefit.
4. Control ventricular rate for patients with AF 
5. Coronary revascularization for patients with reversible
ischemia
6. The effectiveness of ACE inhibitors, β-blockers, or ARBs
is less well established. Recent studies suggest ARBs
decrease hospitalizations in patients with diastolic HF.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. C has several features that are highly specific for HF.
His history of prior myocardial infarction, orthopnea, and
most importantly the clinical findings of JVD and an S3
gallop are highly specific for HF.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, HF? Have you ruled out
the active alternatives? Do other tests need to
be done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis:Mitral regurgitation (MR)
Textbook Presentation 
Patients with MR may be identified due to an asymptomatic
holosystolic murmur at the apex or during an evaluation of shortness
of breath, dyspnea on exertion, orthopnea, and fatigue. Alternatively,
it may be discovered during the evaluation of patients with AF. 
Disease Highlights 
A. Trivial symptomatic MR is commonly discovered on echocar-
diogram. The remainder of the discussion will focus on
patients with more significant regurgitation.
B. Etiologies: MR develops secondary to damaged mitral leaflets
(primary) or a dilated mitral annulus (secondary). 
1. Primary MR 
a. Causes include mitral valve prolapse, rheumatic heart
disease, and endocarditis. 
b. Although most patients with mitral valve prolapse
never require valve replacement, it is the most common
cause of MR and the need for valve replacement.
2. Secondary MR 
a. HF: LV dilatation leads to mitral annular dilatation
and MR.  
b. Ischemic MR: Leaflet tethering shortens the mitral
apparatus, resulting in MR. 
C. Pathophysiology 
1. Compensated MR: MR leads to LA dilatation, and com-
pensatory LV dilatation. If systolic function is maintained,
EF remains normal to high and LV end-systolic volume
remains low because MR acts to reduce LV afterload.
2. Decompensated MR: Systolic function may fail leading to
increased LV end systolic volume, decreased stroke vol-
ume, and decreased EF. This may be irreversible.
3. LA dilatation may lead to AF. 
236 /  CHAPTER 14
D. Disease progression is slow. Average delay from diagnosis to
symptoms is 16 years. However, in patients with severe MR,
the annual mortality is 5%. 
E. Complications include dyspnea, pulmonary edema, AF, and
sudden death.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Physical exam: The typical murmur is a blowing, holosystolic
murmur heard at the apex that radiates to the axilla. S2 may
be inaudible. 
1. Grade 3 or louder systolic murmur 
a. 85% sensitive, 81% specific for moderate to severe MR 
b. LR+, 4.5; LR−, 0.19 
2. S3 gallop may be heard due to increased flow across the
mitral valve. 
B. ECG and chest radiograph may demonstrate LA enlargement
or LV enlargement. Neither is sensitive or specific for the
diagnosis.
C. Echocardiography is the test of choice to diagnose and quan-
tify MR. Transesophageal echocardiography provides more
precise details on valve anatomy and may help determine
whether valve repair (versus replacement) is an option.    
Treatment
A. Serial echocardiography 
1. Serial echocardiography is important to detect signs of LV
dysfunction, which may occur despite the absence of symptoms. 
2. Echocardiography is recommended annually or semiannu-
ally in patients with moderate to severe MR and after a
change in signs or symptoms.  
3. Serial echocardiography is not recommended for asymptomatic
patients with mild MR with normal LV size and function. 
B. Valve repair versus replacement 
1. Valve repair is superior to valve replacement (when tech-
nically feasible). 
2. Valve repair is associated with substantially decreased
operative mortality (2% vs 6%), does not require subse-
quent anticoagulation, and is associated with a signifi-
cantly better EF.
C. ACC/AHA guidelines for medical therapy and valve replace-
ment are summarized in Table 14–5.
D. Treat underlying ischemia.
E. Anticoagulation 
1. Patients are at increased risk for thromboembolism fol-
lowing mitral valve replacement or aortic valve replace-
ment (AVR).  
2. The risk varies depending on the location of the valve
(mitral or aortic), type of valve (mechanical or biopros-
thetic), and presence or absence of additional risk factors. 
3. ACC/AHA guidelines are summarized in Table 14–6. 
Alternative Diagnosis: Chronic Aortic
Regurgitation (AR)
Textbook Presentation 
Patients with chronic AR typically complain of progressive dyspnea
on exertion or the sensation of a pounding heart. Alternatively, the
patient may be asymptomatic, and the diagnosis may be suspected
when an early diastolic murmur is detected by a careful examiner.
Disease Highlights 
A. Secondary to damaged aortic leaflets or dilated aortic root 
B. Etiologies
1. Valvular abnormalities: Rheumatic carditis, bacterial endo-
carditis, congenital bicuspid valves, collagen vascular dis-
ease, fenfluramine and phentermine
2. Aortic root dilatation: Hypertension, ascending aortic
aneurysm, Marfan syndrome, aortic dissection, syphilitic
aortitis 
C. Pathophysiology
1. Regurgitation results in LV remodeling and LV hypertro-
phy to maintain wall stress. LV end-diastolic volume
increases to maintain effective stroke volume.  
2. The increasing preload and afterload may eventually
result in LV systolic dysfunction, and the LV end-systolic
volume increases and EF decreases. LV end-diastolic pres-
sure increases and pulmonary congestion and dyspnea
result.
Table 14–5. ACC/AHA guidelines for medical therapy and
valve replacement in patients with mitral regurgitation.
Treatment 
MR Severity
Modifier
Recommendation
Severe
Symptoms
MV repair
Severe
Mild–moderate LV dysfunction
MV repair
(EF: 30–60%, LVESD > 40 mm)
Severe
Associated with atrial
MV repair
fibrillation or pulmonary
hypertension
Severe
Likelihood of success > 90%
MV repair
Severe
Severe LV dysfunction 
± MV repair1
(EF < 30%, LVESD > 55 mm)
Optimize HF therapy
Any degree
No symptoms or 
Observe
LV dysfunction
No role for
medical therapy
Secondary MR (due to HF)
ACE inhibitors
Diuretics 
β-Blockers 
CRT 
Associated with hypertension
ACE inhibitors
Diuretics
β-Blockers
ACC/AHA,American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association; CRT,
cardiac resynchronization therapy; EF, ejection fraction; HF, heart failure; LV, left
ventricular; LVESD, left ventricular end systolic diameter; MV, mitral valve.
1The optimal approach to patients with MR & severe LV dys-
function is unclear. Surgery is beneficial in some and detrimen-
tal in others
DYSPNEA /  237
3. Significant LV dysfunction can be irreversible. Valve
replacement should be performed before irreversible LV
dysfunction and HF develop (see below). 
4. Progression to symptoms or LV dysfunction in patients with
normal LV function develops in 4% of patients per year.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis 
A. The pulse pressure (the difference between the systolic and
diastolic BP) is often wide in AR due to 2 processes. First, the
large stroke volume increases the systolic BP and second, the
regurgitation of blood back into the LV rapidly lowers the
diastolic BP.    
1. The wide pulse pressure causes many of the classic physi-
cal findings, such as bounding pulses and head bobbing. 
2. Wide pulse pressures are not specific for AR. Other causes
include anemia, fever, pregnancy, large arteriovenous fis-
tula, cirrhosis, thyrotoxicosis, and patent ductus arteriosa.
B. Auscultation 
1. May demonstrate an early decrescendo diastolic murmur
following S2. Best heard at the left sternal border. 
a. Auscultation is more sensitive for moderate to severe AR.
b. Sensitivity is 0–64% among students and residents.
c. Sensitivity is 80–95% among experienced cardiologists.
d. Another study reported that the diastolic murmur of
mild to moderate AR was rarely detected by attending
non-cardiologists (sensitivity 4% mild AR, 14% mod-
erate AR). 
e. However, the finding of a diastolic murmur is highly
specific (98%).
2. A systolic murmur suggesting AS may be heard.
a. Regurgitation results in increasing end diastolic volumes.  
b. Stroke volumes increase to maintain forward flow.  
c. The increased cardiac output may exceed the capacity
of even a normal aortic valve to accommodate flow,
resulting in a high flow systolic murmur across the aor-
tic valve. One study reported that 51% of patients with
mild to moderate AR had a systolic murmur (86% in
moderate AR and 50% in mild AR).
Although a diastolic murmur strongly suggests AR,
systolic murmurs are often the only murmur heard in
patients with AR.
3. Austin Flint murmur 
a. Aortic regurgitant streams may impact the mitral valve
leaflets during diastole resulting in functional mitral
stenosis and a late diastolic murmur over the apex.
b. Sensitivity varies from 0% to 100%.
C. Doppler echocardiography is the test of choice.  
D. Exercise testing can help access LV function during stress.
Treatment
A. The key consideration in patients with AR is the appropriate
timing of valve replacement (Table 14-7). 
1. AV replacement (AVR) should be performed prior to the
onset of irreversible LV dysfunction. 
2. Serial echocardiography is important to detect signs of LV
dysfunction, which may occur in patients without symptoms.
B. AVR is indicated in patients with severe AR associated with
symptoms or LV dysfunction.
C. Replacement valves may be either mechanical or bioprosthetic
(eg, porcine valves). 
1. Mechanical valves are more durable and are often chosen
for young patients to minimize the need for subsequent
AVR. However, patients with mechanical valves require
lifelong anticoagulation. 
2. Bioprosthetic valves are used more often in older patients
(> 70 years) with shorter life expectancies and patients with
higher bleeding risks while receiving anticoagulation
therapy.
D. Afterload reduction (with nifedipine or an ACE inhibitor)
can reduce regurgitation, the rate of progression of cardiac
enlargement, and the need for valve replacement. It should
not be substituted for AVR in patients with an indication for
valve replacement (Table 14–7).
E. β-Blockers are relatively contraindicated. Prolonged diastole
increases regurgitation and accelerates progression.  
Table 14–6. ACC/AHA recommendations for anticoagulation following valve replacement.
Valve Position
Valve Type
Risk factors1
Recommendation
Mitral
Bioprosthetic
Absent
Aspirin 75–100 mg
Present
Aspirin 75–100 mg and warfarin INR 2.5–3.5
Mechanical
Absent
Aspirin 75–100 mg and warfarin INR 2.5–3.5
Present
Aspirin 75–100 mg and warfarin INR 2.5–3.5
Aortic
Bioprosthetic
Absent
Aspirin 75–100 mg
Present
Aspirin 75–100 mg and warfarin INR 2–3
Mechanical
Absent
Aspirin 75 – 100 mg and warfarin INR 2.0–3.02
Present
Aspirin 75–100 mg and warfarin INR 2.5–3.5
1Include atrial fibrillation, prior transient ischemic attack/cerebrovascular accident, heart failure, or hypercoagulable state.
2For Star Edwards valves or disk valves, an INR of 2.5–3.5 is recommended.
ACC/AHA,American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association.
FP
238 /  CHAPTER 14
F. Patients are at increased risk for thromboembolic events fol-
lowing AVR and should receive prophylaxis. (see Table 14–6). 
Alternative Diagnosis: Aortic stenosis (AS) 
See Chapter 26, Syncope. 
Alternative Diagnosis: Atrial fibrillation (AF)  
Textbook Presentation 
Classically, patients with AF seek medical care for palpitations.
The abrupt onset often prompts patients to be seen emergently.
Patients may also complain of shortness of breath and dyspnea on
exertion. Occasionally, AF is detected during a routine office visit
when an irregularly irregular pulse is noted and evaluated.  
Disease Highlights
A. AF is the most common clinical arrhythmia; its incidence
increases with age (3.8% of patients ≥60 years old to 9% in
those ≥80 years old).
B. May be episodic or persistent
C. Secondary to multiple wavelets of excitation that meander
around the atria
D. Etiologies
1. Most common etiologies are hypertension, CAD, and HF. 
2. Acute coronary syndrome: In 2–5% of patients presenting
to the emergency department with new onset AF, it is sec-
ondary to an acute myocardial infarction.
3. Other etiologies include alcoholic heart disease, valvular
heart disease, cor pulmonale, thyrotoxicosis, and PE.
E. Complications
1. Stroke: Stasis promotes thrombus formation within the
atria. Subsequent embolization results in stroke and other
systemic emboli.
a. The annual stroke rate in AF patients not receiving
anticoagulation is 4.1% per year. For the subgroup
with a prior transient ischemic attack or stroke, the
annual stroke rate increases to 13% per year.
b. AF accounts for 1/6 of all strokes at an annual cost
of $6.6 billion.
c. Stroke is more common in patients with AF who have
other clinical risk factors:
(1) Valvular heart disease
(2) Prior transient ischemic attack or stroke 
(3) Increasing age
(4) Hypertension
(5) Diabetes
(6) HF
(7) Gender (women affected 1.5–3.0 times more
than men) 
2. Worsening HF due to loss of atrial kick; especially impor-
tant in patients with stiff LV (ie, diastolic dysfunction)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Easily recognized on ECG (Figure 14–3)
B. Episodic AF can be detected with Holter monitoring or event
recorders.
Treatment
A. Evaluation
1. ECG can document AF, ischemia, bundle-branch block, a
delta wave or short PR suggesting Wolff-Parkinson-White
syndrome, or signs of right heart strain suggesting PE. 
Table 14–7. Treatment recommendations for patients
with AR.
Treatment 
Severity 
Modifier
Recommendations
Severe
Symptomatic
AVR
In patients who are not
candidates for AVR, ACE
inhibitors or nifedipine 
can be used to reduce
progression 
LV dysfunction: EF ≤50%
AVR
LV dilatation (without
Afterload reduction or
symptoms or dysfunction)
AVR if severe dilatation 
Mild to
Asymptomatic, normal EF,
No therapy
moderate
no hypertension
Any degree
Hypertension
Afterload reduction
Aortic root dilatation
AVR
> 4.5–5 cm
AR, aortic regurgitation;AVR, aortic valve replacement; EF, ejection fraction; LV,
left ventricular.
Figure 14–3. ECG of atrial fibrillation demonstrating irregularly spaced QRS complexes and fibrillatory p waves.
Fibrillatory
p waves
DYSPNEA /  239
2. Baseline echocardiogram to assess LV function and stroke risk
3. Obtain baseline thyroid function tests to rule out
hyperthyroidism.
4. Electrolyte, BUN, and creatinine testing is recommended.
5. Consider evaluation for other etiologies (eg, PE).
B. Rhythm control versus rate control
1. Cardioversion should be performed immediately in unsta-
ble patients.
2. In stable patients, 2 options exist: rhythm control or rate
control.
a. Rhythm control attempts to restore normal sinus
rhythm using cardioversion and antiarrhythmic agents.
b. Rate control allows persistent AF. The ventricular
response is controlled with atrioventricular nodal
blocking agents (eg, β-blockers, diltiazem, verapamil,
or digoxin). Anticoagulation is used to prevent stroke.  
c. Studies show that rhythm control and rate control
results in similar mortality and stroke rates, even in
patients with underlying HF.
d. Rate control is the recommended strategy in most
patients. (Patients with their first episode of AF or with
symptoms or exercise intolerance may choose rhythm
control.)
(1) Uses β-blockers, diltiazem, verapamil, or digoxin
(2) Verapamil and β-blockers should not be used con-
currently in the same patient due to a high fre-
quency of complications (bradycardia or HF).
(3) β-Blockers, diltiazem, and verapamil should be
avoided in patients with decompensated HF.
(4) Digoxin 
(a) Less effective at controlling ventricular
response during activity and in paroxysmal AF 
(b) Useful in patients with decreased LV function
(c) Second-line drug
e. Rhythm control therapy
(1) Anticoagulation therapy is recommended for 3 weeks
prior to cardioversion and 4 weeks after in certain
patients who are at high risk for existing atrial
thrombi and embolism including patients with AF
for longer than 48 hours or of unknown duration
as well as patients with mitral valve disease, heart
failure, or prior embolism. 
(2) Low-risk patients (without the aforementioned
risk factors) and AF of recent onset (< 48 hours)
can be cardioverted without delay. 
(a) Heparin should be administered at presentation. 
(b) Alternatively, a transesophageal echocardiog-
raphy can be performed in these patients,
and cardioversion may be done if no throm-
bus is seen. 
(c) In either case, these patients should receive
anticoagulation therapy for 4 weeks after
cardioversion. 
(3) The probability of conversion to normal sinus
rhythm decreases the longer the AF lasts.
(4) Multiple antiarrhythmic drugs have been used to
convert patients to normal sinus rhythm. Flecainide
should be avoided in patients with a history of CAD
or LV dysfunction. Cardiac consultation is advised.
C. The ACC/AHA have published guidelines for stroke preven-
tion in persistent or paroxysmal AF.
1. Warfarin and aspirin have been used to prevent strokes in
patients with AF. 
2. Multiple studies suggest that warfarin is superior to aspirin
at preventing stroke with an RR reduction of 64% versus
19% for aspirin. In the absence of contraindications, the
benefit of warfarin usually outweighs the risk. 
3. The absolute benefit of warfarin increases as the risk of
stroke increases. 
a. Warfarin reduces the absolute rate of stroke on average
by 2.7% per year, but in patients with prior transient
ischemic attack/cerebrovascular accident, the absolute
risk reduction is 8.4% per year. 
b. AHA/ACC guidelines are summarized in Table 14–8.
4. Two special groups are worth mentioning.
a. Although physicians worry about bleeding complica-
tions in the elderly, studies show that the elderly
patients with AF are at high risk for stroke and benefit
from anticoagulation if they are carefully selected. 
b. Patients with lone AF (age < 60, no heart disease,
hypertension or risk factors) are at the lowest risk for
stroke (< 1% per year when treated with aspirin) and
the absolute risk reduction from warfarin is very small
and similar in magnitude to the risk of hemorrhage
from warfarin. 
(1) The AHA/ACC does not recommend warfarin for
these patients. However, physicians should still
discuss the benefits and risks of warfarin therapy
with these patients to decide between aspirin and
warfarin therapy. 
(2) It is important to explain that although the risk of
stroke (without warfarin) is low, the long-term
Table 14–8. Recommendations to prevent stroke in
patients with persistent or paroxysmal atrial fibrillation.
Therapeutic 
Risk Category
Definition
Recommendations
High risk
Prior TIA/CVA
Warfarin
Valvular heart disease
Moderate risk
≥2 risk factors1
Warfarin
Low risk
1 risk factor
Warfarin or aspirin 
Low risk
2 of 3 less-validated risk
Warfarin or aspirin
factors: age 65–74,
women, CAD
Lone atrial
Age ≤60, no heart  
Aspirin
fibrillation
disease, no hypertension 
or risk factors
1Risk factors include history of hypertension, heart failure, age ≥75 years, dia-
betes mellitus.
CAD, coronary artery disease;TIA/CVA, transient ischemic attack/cerebrovas-
cular accident.
240 /  CHAPTER 14
consequences of stroke can be grave and are usually
more permanent than those of hemorrhage.
5. Contraindications to warfarin therapy include recent GI or
CNS hemorrhage, recent trauma or surgery, uncontrolled
hypertension, noncompliance, syncope, or alcoholism.
Alternative Diagnosis: CAD 
See Chapter 8, Chest Pain. 
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mr. C undergoes a transthoracic echocardiogram, which
reveals marked systolic dysfunction and an EF of 18%.
There are regional wall motion abnormalities. The anterior
wall is very hypokinetic. There is no significant AS or AR.
MR is mild.  
Mr. C’s echocardiogram confirms HF. The regional wall motion
abnormalities suggest an ischemic etiology, likely secondary to his
prior infarction. A stress test to rule out reversible ischemia would
be appropriate. The echocardiogram rules out significant valvular
heart disease as the primary etiology of his dyspnea. 
1
A stress thallium study is performed. This reveals a large
prior myocardial infarction but no reversible ischemia. The
EF is 20%.
The stress test confirms prior myocardial infarction as the cause of
Mr. C’s HF without evidence of active ischemia.
Mr. C is admitted for treatment of his HF. He starts a salt-
restricted diet and is given diuretics, ACE inhibitors, and β-
blockers (when his HF is controlled). The diuresis results in a
20-pound weight loss, and his dyspnea on exertion improves
markedly. His orthopnea resolves. He remains stable at follow-
up 5 years later. 
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mrs. L is a 58-year-old woman who arrives at the emer-
gency department with a chief complaint of shortness of
breath. She reports that this has developed gradually
over the last 3–6 months. Six months ago, she was able
to walk as far as she wanted without any shortness of
breath. Now she is experiencing dyspnea even walking
around her house. She denies any episodes of acute
shortness of breath, chest pain, or hemoptysis. She
denies wheezing. She has no history of myocardial infarc-
tion, hypertension, or known heart disease. She smoked
1 pack of cigarettes per day for 10 years and quit when
she was 28 years old. She drinks 1 glass of wine per week.
She works as an accountant and spends her free time
with her grandchildren. She has no unusual hobbies. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. L’s shortness of breath is not only severe but markedly worse
than baseline. Both of these features should prompt a thorough
investigation. Unfortunately, the clinical information does not
suggest a specific diagnosis. There is no history of CAD, hyper-
tension, or alcohol abuse to suggest HF nor is there a significant
tobacco history to suggest COPD. A careful exam is vital to look
for helpful clues. 
2
On physical exam, the patient appears comfortable at
rest, but becomes markedly dyspneic with ambulation.
Vital signs are BP, 140/70 mm Hg; pulse, 72 bpm; tem-
perature, 37.1°C; RR, 20 breaths per minute. Conjunctiva
are pink. Lung exam is clear to percussion and ausculta-
tion. There are no crackles or wheezes. Cardiac exam
reveals a regular rate and rhythm. S1 and S2 are normal.
There is no JVD, S3, S4, or murmur. There is only trace
peripheral edema. Abdominal exam is normal. A chest
radiograph, ECG, and CBC are normal.
Despite a thorough exam, the leading diagnosis is unclear. In such
cases, it is particularly important to systematically review the dif-
ferential diagnosis in order to arrive at the correct diagnosis. Each
item on the list should be reviewed in light of the history and
physical to determine whether it remains in the differential and
should be explored further, or whether the existing information
makes it highly unlikely.  
Refer to the differential diagnosis listed at the beginning of the
chapter. The absence of a murmur makes MR and AS unlikely,
since the clinical exam is 85–90% sensitive for these conditions.
The clinical exam is less sensitive for AR (see above). Therefore,
AR remains on the differential diagnosis. An arrhythmia is essen-
tially ruled out by the patient’s normal heart rate during symp-
toms. HF is not particularly suggested by the history and physical
exam, but it cannot be excluded given the low sensitivity of the S3
gallop and JVD. The patient denies any history of chest pain, but
dyspnea is occasionally an anginal equivalent, thus CAD remains
a possibility. Alveolar diseases are unlikely given the normal chest
radiograph. Pneumonia seems highly unlikely given the absence of
cough, fever, or infiltrate on chest film. Asthma remains a possi-
bility although this is not particularly suggested by the history or
physical. COPD is effectively ruled out by the trivial smoking
DYSPNEA /  241
history. PE cannot be excluded by the current information and
remains on the list, although the presentation is not particularly
classic for PE. Since PE is associated with a high mortality, it
should be considered a must not miss possibility. A significant
pleural effusion or pneumothorax are ruled out by the normal
chest radiograph, which also makes interstitial disease unlikely
(although not impossible). Anemia is ruled out by the normal
CBC. We can now focus on the clinical clues and diagnostic tests
for these remaining possible diagnoses (AR, HF, CAD, asthma,
and PE). Table 14–9 lists the differential diagnosis. 
A methodical approach to the differential diagnosis
is vital whenever the leading diagnosis is unclear or
when the leading hypothesis cannot be confirmed.
2
In terms of CAD, she denies any history of exertional chest
pain or pressure and has minimal coronary risk factors.
(Her last cholesterol level was normal [180 mg/dL] with
an HDL of 70 mg/dL. She has no history of diabetes mel-
litus, no family history of CAD, and no recent 
tobacco use.) With respect to asthma, she denies any
history of wheezing or worsening cough associated with
cold, exercise, pets, or dust. With respect to PE, she
denies sudden onset of chest pain, chest pain with inspi-
ration, hemoptysis, immobilization, cancer, surgery, fam-
ily history of venous thromboembolism or leg swelling. She
does take hormone replacement therapy (HRT). 
An echocardiogram reveals normal LV function and a
normal aortic valve. Pulmonary function tests reveal nor-
mal total lung capacity, FEV1, and DLCO. A methacholine
challenge test is also normal.
Considering each diagnosis in turn, the patient’s physical exam
and echocardiogram exclude HF and AR. The patient’s pretest
probability of CAD is quite low given her age, sex, and risk factors
(3.2%; see Chapter 8, Chest Pain). In addition, the Framingham
data suggest the likelihood of a coronary event in a female patient
with these CAD risk factors to be < 1% over the ensuing 8 years.
The history as well as the normal pulmonary function tests with
methacholine challenge make asthma very unlikely. Although her
history sounds atypical for PE, she is taking HRT, a known risk
factor for venous thromboembolism. Given the exclusion of the
other diagnoses, PE becomes more probable. You revise your dif-
ferential diagnosis and make PE both your leading and must not
miss diagnosis. 
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis of PE? If not, what other infor-
mation do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: PE 
Textbook Presentation 
Classically, patients with PE experience the sudden onset of short-
ness of breath and severe chest pain that increases with inspiration.
Patients may complain of hemoptysis and associated leg swelling.  
Disease Highlights
A. Pathophysiology: Most commonly occurs when a lower
extremity venous thrombosis embolizes to the lung. Upper
extremity thrombi may also cause PE.
1. 80% of patients with PE have deep venous thrombosis
(DVT)
2. 48% of patients with DVT have PE (often asymptomatic)
B. Symptoms vary markedly. Massive obstruction may result in
RV failure and death, whereas lesser obstruction may be
asymptomatic.
C. 3-month mortality is 17.5%
D. Risk factors for venous thromboembolism 
1. Age (2 × increased risk per decade)
2. Estrogenic factors
a. Obesity
b. Oral birth control pill      
c. HRT 
3. Immobilization (including prolonged ground or air travel)
Table 14–9. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. L.
Diagnostic
Hypothesis
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Heart failure 
Poorly controlled
Echocardiogram
hypertension or history
BNP 
of myocardial infarction
S3 gallop, JVD
Crackles on lung exam
Peripheral edema
Coronary
History of symptoms 
ECG
artery
with exertion (eg,
Exercise stress 
disease 
chest pain, pressure)  
tests
Risk factors for coronary
artery disease
Aortic
Early diastolic murmur 
Echocardiogram
regurgitation
left sternal border
Asthma
History of wheezing
Peak flow
Chest tightness
Pulmonary 
Worsening cough with
function tests
cold, exercise, pets, mold
Methacholine 
challenge 
Response to 
treatment
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Pulmonary
Pleuritic chest pain 
CTA
embolism
Risk factors 
D-dimer
(immobilization,
Duplex leg exam
postoperative or
Ventilation 
postpartum states,
perfusion (V/Q) scan 
estrogen therapy, cancer,
Pulmonary 
thrombophilia)
angiography
CTA = CT angiography.
242 /  CHAPTER 14
4. Postoperative or postpartum states (hip fracture surgery,
and total hip or knee replacement create particularly
high risk)
5. Cancer
6. History of venous thromboembolism
7. Thrombophilia 
a. Antiphospholipid antibodies: Present in 2–8.5% of
patients with venous thromboembolism 
b. Factor V Leiden
(1) Most common thrombophilia
(2) Mutation in factor V causes resistance to cleavage
by activated protein C
(3) 11% of patients with DVT
(4) Confers a 2.7 × increased risk of venous
thromboembolism 
(5) Combined with oral birth control pill, mutation
increases risk 35 times
c. Prothrombin gene mutation
d. Protein C or S deficiency (rare)
(1) Protein C and S are naturally occurring anticoagulants
(2) Deficiency is associated with hypercoagulability.
(3) Synthesis of protein C and S requires vitamin K.
(4) Warfarin decreases synthesis of both factors
(5) Assays for protein C and S must be performed
while patients are not taking warfarin. 
e. Antithrombin III deficiency (also rare): Assay must be
done while patient is not taking heparin. 
f. Hyperhomocysteinemia: 3 × increased risk of venous
thromboembolism
g. Increased factor VIII: 6 × increased risk
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Symptoms 
1. A myriad of symptoms and signs may be seen in patients
with PE.  
2. The prevalence of these findings is probably overestimated
in the literature because much of these data came from
older trials, which used angiography and included a large
percentage (57%) of patients with massive PE.
B. Classic presentations 
1. Chest pain with dyspnea or chest pain, dyspnea, and
hemoptysis are uncommon and may be seen in as few as
20–33% of patients. 
2. Between 12% and 25% of patients have isolated dyspnea,
and about 80% of patients with PE have risk factors.
C. Studies have reported a range of prevalence of various symptoms
in PE, in part dependent on the population (Table 14–10).
1. The modest LRs (comparing patients in whom PE was
considered and ruled in or ruled out respectively) suggest
that signs and symptoms can neither rule in nor rule out
the disease. 
2. Sudden onset of dyspnea and leg swelling favor PE
whereas fever, cough, crackles, and wheezes do not. 
D. Tachypnea has been reported in 54–85% of patients and an
accentuated P2 in 15–57%. 
E. One study reported that 25% of patients with an unexplained
exacerbation of COPD actually had a PE. Unexplained exac-
erbation was defined as the absence of signs of lower respira-
tory infection (increased sputum, purulence, fever, cold or
sore throat) or patients who had parenchymal consolidation
on chest radiograph without fever or chills.  
The classic presentation of PE is actually the excep-
tion. Patients may have very few symptoms. A high
index of suspicion must be maintained for the diag-
nosis of PE.
F. Chest film
1. Normal in 50% of patients with PE
2. May reveal focal oligemia (45%), wedge-shaped infiltrate
(15%), or pleural effusions (45%)
G. ABG may demonstrate hypoxemia and hypocarbia, but find-
ings are neither sensitive nor specific for PE.
1. PaO2 < 80 mm Hg: Sensitivity 58–74%; LR+ 1.2, LR−0.8
2. PaCO2 < 36 mm Hg: Sensitivity 44%; LR+ 1.1, LR−0.9
3. PaO2 and PaCO2 do not differ between patients in whom
PE is considered and ruled in or ruled out.
Patients with PE may not be hypoxic. Therefore,
normal arterial oxygen does not rule out PE. (On
the other hand, unexplained hypoxia, particularly
in the company of a normal chest radiograph,
should raise the suspicion of PE.)  
H. ECG
1. Useful to diagnose other conditions (ie, myocardial
infarction)
Table 14–10. Accuracy of symptoms and signs in PE.
Symptoms
and Signs
Sensitivity(%)
Specificity(%)
LR+
LR−
Dyspnea
59–84
51
1.7
0.3
Dyspnea,
73–78
71
2.7
0.3
sudden onset
Pleuritic
32–74
70
1.5
0.8
chest pain
Cough
11–51
85
0.7
1.0
Hemoptysis
9–30
95
1.8
1.0
Syncope
5–26
87
2.0
0.9
Tachycardia
24–70
77
1.0
1.0
Crackles
18–58
74
0.7
1.1
Wheezes
4–21
87
0.3
1.1
Fever (>38ºC)
7
79
0.3
1.2
Pleural rub
3–18
96
1
1
Leg swelling
17–41
91
1.9
0.9
DYSPNEA /  243
2. Certain findings suggest PE but are unusual
a. S1Q3T3 (19–50%)
b. T wave inversions in V1–V4 are seen in 23–68% of
patients with PE. This ECG pattern also suggests an acute
coronary syndrome, but the additional presence of T wave
inversions in both leads III and V1 strongly suggests PE
(88% sensitive, 99% specific; LR+ 88, LR−0.12). 
c. Transient right bundle-branch block (6–67%)
I. Troponin 
1. A marker of myocardial damage
2. Elevated in up to 57% of patients with documented PE
J. D-dimers
1. Fibrin breakdown products
2. Elevated in many conditions: surgery, trauma, cancer, end-
stage renal disease, and venous thromboembolism
3. Nonspecific. Elevated levels do not diagnose venous
thromboembolism
4. Sensitivity to rule out venous thromboembolism depends
on assay used.
a. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and
quantitative rapid ELISA are more sensitive than other
assays (95–98%; LR−0.05–0.11). 
b. Other D-dimer assays are not sensitive enough to rule
out venous thromboembolism. 
c. A negative quantitative rapid ELISA markedly
decreases the likelihood of PE and effectively rules out
PE in patients with a low to moderate pretest proba-
bility of PE.
K. CT angiography (CTA)
1. Test of choice in moderate- to high-risk patients 
2. Noninvasive 
3. May demonstrate filling defects in proximal pulmonary
arteries
4. Positive findings highly specific for PE
5. Makes alternative diagnosis in 25% of patients (lym-
phadenopathy, tumor, aortic dissection)
6. A negative study effectively rules out PE in low- to
moderate-risk patients 
L. Ventilation-perfusion (V˙/Q˙ ) scan
1. Radionuclear study used less frequently since advent of CTA
2. Radio-isotope infused and inhaled 
3. (V˙/Q˙ ) images are compared. A variety of results may be seen.
4. High probability scan
a. Multiple areas of absent perfusion with normal
ventilation
b. Effectively rules in PE 
(1) 60% sensitive, 96% specific
(2) LR+ 15, LR −0.4
5. Normal or near normal perfusion scan effectively rules out
PE. (Normal scans are seen in 0–2% of patients with PE.)
6. Nondiagnostic scan (low or intermediate)
a. Matched areas of V˙/Q˙ abnormality 
b. 67% of patients who undergo V˙/Q˙ testing have this
pattern
c. Neither rules in or out PE
M. Angiography
1. Gold standard
2. Invasive and rarely used; serious complications occur in
0–3% of patients
N. Diagnostic Approach
1. In order to select the best strategy, it is critical to assess the
patient’s pretest probability of PE first. 
a. The Wells score is a validated tool (Table 14–11). As
the pretest probability of PE increases, more sensitive
strategies must be used to effectively rule out PE. 
b. Figure 14–4 shows one algorithm.
2. Low-pretest probability of PE 
a. Several studies have documented an excellent negative
predictive value (NPV) (99–100%) in patients with a
Wells score of ≤4 and a negative high-sensitivity D-
dimer, effectively ruling out PE. 
b. A separate meta-analysis suggested this strategy for
patients with a Wells score of < 2, but recommended a
CTA in patients with a higher score. 
c. A negative CTA in low- to moderate-risk patients also
effectively rules out PE.
3. Moderate-high probability of PE (Wells score > 4).
a. A negative D-dimer is no longer adequate to rule out
PE.
b. CTA 
(1) CTA alone has an excellent PPV (92–96%). 
(2) However, in high-risk patients (Wells score > 6),
the negative PPV of CTA alone has varied from
60%, 75%, 89%, to 98%.
(a) Additional testing is appropriate in high-risk
patients with a negative CTA; options include
duplex leg ultrasonography, indirect CT of the leg
veins (CTV), V˙/Q˙ scanning, and pulmonary
angiography. 
Table 14–11. Wells score in the diagnosis of PE.
Criteria
Points
Clinical signs and symptoms of DVT (minimum
3
of leg swelling and pain with palpation 
of the deep veins)
An alternative diagnosis is less likely than PE
3
Heart rate > 100 bpm
1.5
Immobilization or surgery in the previous 4 weeks
1.5
Previous DVT/PE
1.5
Hemoptysis
1
Malignancy (on treatment, treated in last
1
6 months or palliative)
DVT/PE, deep venous thrombosis/pulmonary embolism.
Modified, with permission, from Wells PS et al. Derivation of a simple clinical
model to categorize patients probability of pulmonary embolism: increasing the
models utility with the SimpliRED D-dimer. Thromb Haemost. 2000;83:416–20.
244 /  CHAPTER 14
(b) Since a diagnosis of DVT is taken as a surro-
gate marker for the diagnosis of PE, duplex leg
ultrasonography is the most commonly used
test in this situation. 
(c) Another alternative to rule out DVT is CTV,
which can be performed at the same time as
CTA. However, some studies suggest that it is
less sensitive than leg ultrasound (sensitivity
60–100%, specificity 93–100%). 
(d) A combined strategy of CTA and duplex leg
ultrasonography has an excellent NPV
(≈100%) and is advisable for patients with a
high likelihood of PE. 
c. In patients with renal insufficiency and contrast allergy,
V˙/Q˙ scanning can be considered in place of CTA.
d. Pulmonary angiography is rarely used. 
Diagnosis of DVT
A. Given the overlap of PE and DVT (and the same therapy),
the diagnosis of DVT is often taken as evidence of concomi-
tant PE.
B. Several clinical features modestly increase the likelihood of
DVT including malignancy (LR+ 2.7), prior DVT (LR+ 2.3),
immobilization (LR+ 2.0), and recent surgery (LR+ 1.8). 
C. Signs and symptoms are not very helpful at ruling DVT in or
out. Leg swelling is only 32% sensitive, LR+ 1.45, LR−0.67;
leg pain LR+ 1.08, LR– 0.9; Homan sign LR+ 1.4, LR– 0.87. 
The clinical exam is insensitive for the diagnosis of
DVT. Clinicians must have a low threshold for
ordering D-dimer or duplex studies.
D. Clinical prediction rule can help predict risk of DVT
(Table 14–12).
E. D-dimer 
1. 88–92% sensitive, 45–72% specific 
2. In patients with a low clinical risk, the NPV of a negative
D-dimer is 99%.
F. Duplex ultrasonography 
1. 89–96% sensitive for symptomatic proximal DVT,
94–99% specific; LR+, 24, LR−, 0.05
2. Incidence of symptomatic DVT < 1% in patients with ini-
tial negative color duplex exam. 
3. Less sensitive for distal (below the knee) DVT 73–93%
4. Patients with increasing symptoms should be reevaluated.
G. Other options include venography (invasive) and magnetic
resonance direct thrombus imaging (accurate but costly).
H. Diagnostic strategy 
1. A recent meta-analysis suggested that patients with a low
pretest probability of DVT could be evaluated with a high
sensitivity D-dimer. A negative result effectively rules out
DVT. 
2. For patients at moderate- to high-risk for DVT, those with
a history of prior VTE, or those with comorbidities, an
ultrasound is recommended (Figure 14–5). 
3. For patients with suspected calf DVT, a repeat study 1 week
later can be useful to rule out proximal extension.
Treatment of PE and DVT
A. Options include low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH),
unfractionated heparin, and fondaparinux. 
Assess clinical probability of PE
(Wells score)
D-D
or CTA
Clinical follow-up
CTA, CT angiography.
1Some authorities reserve D-dimer testing for patients with scores < 2
D-dimer
low
D-dimer
elevated
(–)
(+)
CTA
Low
Wells score ≤ 41
CTA
Consider additional work-up in high-
risk patients (Wells > 6). Options
include bilateral leg duplex, CTV,
V/Q scan, or pulmonary angiogram.
Treat
Moderate–High
Wells > 4
Figure 14–4. Diagnostic algorithm for suspected pulmonary emboli.
DYSPNEA /  245
B. LMWH 
1. Superior to unfractionated heparin at reducing mortality
and bleeding in the treatment of DVT and at least equiv-
alent in patients with hemodynamically stable PE
2. Easier to dose and more consistently therapeutic than
unfractionated IV heparin. 
3. Associated with a lower risk of heparin-induced thrombo-
cytopenia than unfractionated heparin. 
4. In obese patients and patients with renal insufficiency, the
bioavailability of LMWH is difficult to predict. Consulta-
tion is recommended for such patients.
C. Oxygen should be administered to patients with hypoxemia.
D. Warfarin is started at the same time as heparin or LMWH.  
1. The initial warfarin dose is 5–10 mg/day for the first 2
days and is adjusted based on the INR; 10 mg/day is supe-
rior to 5 mg/day in well-nourished outpatients not taking
antibiotics.
2. The target INR is 2.0–3.0. 
3. Heparin is coadministered for ≥5 days and discontinued
when the INR has been therapeutic for 2 consecutive days.
4. Patients with venous thromboembolism secondary to the
antiphospholipid syndrome may require more intensive
anticoagulation. The optimal target INR is uncertain.
5. Patients with venous thromboembolism secondary to
active cancer have a high rate of recurrence during war-
farin therapy. Long-term LMWH is superior.
6. Long-term anticoagulation: Duration of therapy
a. Warfarin is effective during therapy. For many patients, the
risk of recurrence increases when warfarin is discontinued.
b. The risk of recurrence varies depending on the precip-
itating risk factor for the initial venous thromboem-
bolism. From lowest to highest risk:
(1) Postoperative or postpartum patients
(2) Other short-term risk factors (immobilization)
(3) Idiopathic venous thromboembolism (no clinical
risk factors or thrombophilia)
(4) Thrombophilic states
(5) Antiphospholipid syndrome
(6) Active cancer
c. Persistent clot seen on duplex exam at the completion
of anticoagulation therapy increases the risk of subse-
quent VTE (Table 14–10).
d. D-dimer elevation at the completion of therapy also
increases the risk of recurrent VTE in patients with a
single idiopathic VTE. Furthermore, restarting antico-
agulation in these patients reduced the annual risk to
1.3% (Table 14–13).
e. Patients with venous thromboembolism secondary to
postoperative or postpartum states should be treated
for 3–6 months.
f. A meta-analysis concluded that therapy should be pro-
longed (> 12 months and perhaps indefinitely) in
patients with venous thromboembolism that was not
secondary to a short-term identified risk factor (ie, sur-
gery, postpartum state). Extended duration and poten-
tially indefinite anticoagulation should be considered
in patients with venous thromboembolism and any of
the following:
(1) Recurrent venous thromboembolism 
(2) Cancer
(3) Thrombophilia
(4) Idiopathic venous thromboembolism
g. A meta-analysis suggested the RR of recurrence after
discontinuation of warfarin was higher in men than
women (RR 1.56).
h. Patients with symptomatic isolated calf vein thrombo-
sis should be treated with anticoagulation for at least
6–12 weeks. If for any reason anticoagulation is not
administered, serial noninvasive studies of the lower
extremity should be performed over the next 10–14 days
to assess for proximal extension of thrombus.
E. Inferior vena caval procedures 
1. Inferior vena cava filters protect patients from PE but are
associated with an increased risk of subsequent DVT.
2. Indications for placement
a. Contraindication or complications of anticoagulant therapy 
b. Recurrent venous thromboembolism that occurs
despite adequate anticoagulation 
c. Chronic recurrent embolism or massive PE with pul-
monary hypertension
Table 14–12. Clinical model for predicting the pretest
probability of deep venous thrombosis.1
Clinical Characteristic
Score
Active cancer (patient receiving treatment for
1
cancer within the previous 6 mo or currently
receiving palliative treatment)
Paralysis, paresis, or recent plaster immobilization
1
of the lower extremities
Recently bedridden for 3 days or more, or major
1
surgery within the previous 12 wk requiring
general or regional anesthesia
Localized tenderness along the distribution of the
1
deep venous system
Entire leg swollen
1
Calf swelling at least 3 cm larger than that of the
1
asymptomatic side (measured 10 cm below
tibial tuberosity)
Pitting edema confined to the symptomatic leg
1
Collateral superficial veins (nonvaricose)
1
Previously documented deep venous thrombosis
1
Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as deep
–2
venous thrombosis
1A score of two or higher indicates that the probability of deep venous throm-
bosis is likely; a score of less than two indicates that the probability of deep
venous thrombosis is unlikely. In patients with symptoms in both legs, the more
symptomatic leg is used.
Modified, with permission, from Wells PS et al. Evaluation of D-dimer in the diag-
nosis of suspected deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:1227–35.
Copyright © 2003 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
246 /  CHAPTER 14
F. For massive PE associated with hypotension, thrombolysis
and catheter and surgical embolectomy have been used.
G. Compression stockings are recommended for patients older
than 40 years with proximal DVT; patients should start wear-
ing the stockings within 1 month of diagnosis and continue
wearing them for ≥1 year to decrease the likelihood of post-
thrombotic syndrome (NNT 4).
H. Primary prevention of venous thromboembolism 
1. 25% of venous thromboembolic events are associated with
hospitalization. At particularly high risk are patients
undergoing hip fracture surgery, hip or knee replacement,
and those with spinal cord injury. 
2. Hospitalized medical patients account for 50–75% of
hospital-associated venous thromboembolism. 
a. Anticoagulation prophylaxis has been demonstrated to
reduce fatal and nonfatal venous thromboembolism.  
b. At particularly high risk include patients who are older
than 40 years, who are hospitalized for ≥3 days with
limited mobility, and who have ≥1 of the following:
(1) Acute infections disease 
(2) Class III or IV HF 
(3) Acute myocardial infarction
(4) Cerebrovascular accident 
(5) Cancer 
(6) Acute respiratory disease 
(7) Rheumatic disease
(8) Body mass index > 30 
(9) Recent surgery or trauma 
(10) Thrombophilia or prior venous thromboembolism.
3. The intensity of the prophylaxis depends on the specific
clinical situation. Options include compression stockings,
pneumatic compression devices (particularly useful in
patients who have active bleeding or are at high risk), and
a variety of heparinoids. Guidelines are updated frequently
by the American College of Chest Physicians.
I. Work-up for thrombophilia: Duration of therapy may be
affected by presence of underlying thrombophilia. Clear
guidelines for routine testing have not been determined. Con-
sider tests for thrombophilic states in patients without clear
precipitant of venous thromboembolism.
Assess
1. Clinical probability of DVT
 (Wells score)
2. Prior history of VTE
3. Comorbidities
D-D
Clinical follow-up
D-dimer
low
D-dimer
elevated
Leg ultrasound
Leg ultrasound
Wells score ≤ 0
No prior VTE
No comorbidities
Wells score > 0
Prior VTE
Older age
Comorbidities
Figure 14–5. Diagnostic algorithm for DVT.
Table 14–13. Annual recurrence rates of venous
thromboembolism after completing warfarin therapy.
Risk Category
Annual recurrence rate (%)
Postpartum or
0
postoperative state
Duplex1 (−)
Duplex (+)
Short-term risk factor
0
7.1
Idiopathic VTE
4.4
7.5
Thrombophilic state
10
23
Cancer (on active therapy)
18–342
D-dimer at completion
of warfarin
Normal (no anticoagulation)
4.4%
Elevated (no anticoagulation)
10.9%
Elevated (anticoagulation
1.3%
restarted)
1Duplex result at the completion of 3 months of anticoagulation therapy.
2Recurrence rates were despite ongoing active therapy (18% for patients on
LWMH and 34% for patients continuing on warfarin.)
DYSPNEA /  247
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
You review the patient’s Wells score and assign her 
3 points since PE is the most likely diagnosis. She also
takes HRT, which is a risk factor for PE. Although there
is some debate about the use of D-dimer to rule out PE
in a patient with a score of 3, you elect to perform a CTA
rather than a D-dimer because PE is the most likely
diagnosis. 
The CTA reveals multiple small pulmonary emboli.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, PE? Have you ruled
out the active alternatives? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
The CTA is highly specific for PE. At this point, PE is ruled in and
further confirmation is unnecessary. There is no need for further
testing to exclude alternative diagnoses.
Alternative Diagnosis: Asthma 
See Chapter 28, Wheezing and Stridor.
Alternative Diagnosis: CAD 
See Chapter 8, Chest Pain.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
A hypercoagulable work-up is sent to assess future risk
of recurrence (prior to heparin and warfarin therapy). Her
HRT is stopped. Mrs. L is started on LMWH and warfarin.
At follow-up 6 months later, she reports feeling better.
Her anticoagulation therapy has been uncomplicated.
REFERENCES
American College of Cardiology; American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines (Writing Committee to revise the 1998 guidelines for the
management of patients with valvular heart disease); Society of Cardiovas-
cular Anesthesiologists, Bonow RO, Carabello BA, Chatterjee K et al.
ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular
heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (writing Committee to
Revise the 1998 guidelines for the management of patients with valvular
heart disease) developed in collaboration with the Society of Cardiovascular
Anesthesiologists endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography
and Interventions and the Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2006;48(3):e1–148.
Battaglia M, Pewsner D, Juni P, Egger M, Bucher HC, Bachmann LM. Accuracy of
B-type natriuretic peptide tests to exclude congestive heart failure: systematic
review of test accuracy studies. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1073–80.
Bell WR, Simon TL, DeMets DL. The clinical features of submassive and massive
pulmonary emboli. Am J Med. 1977;62(3):355–60.
European Heart Rhythm Association; Heart Rhythm Society, Fuster V, Rydén LE,
Cannom DS et al; American College of Cardiology; American Heart Associ-
ation Task Force on Practice Guidelines; European Society of Cardiology
Committee for Practice Guidelines; Writing Committee to Revise the 2001
Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Atrial Fibrillation.
ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for the management of patients with atrial
fibrillation--executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardi-
ology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the
European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing
Committee to Revise the 2001 Guidelines for the Management of Patients
With Atrial Fibrillation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48(4):854–906.
Goodacre S, Sutton AJ, Sampson FC. Meta-analysis: The value of clinical assess-
ment in the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis. Ann Intern Med.
2005;143(2):129–39.
Hart RG, Pearce LA, Aguilar MI. Meta-analysis: antithrombotic therapy to prevent
stroke in patients who have nonvalvular atrial fibrillation. Ann Intern Med.
2007;146(12):857–67.
Heidenreich PA, Schnittger I, Hancock SL, Atwood JE. A systolic murmur is a
common presentation of aortic regurgitation detected by echocardiography.
Clin Cardiol. 2004;27(9):502–6.
Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Guideline Update for
the Diagnosis and Management of Chronic Heart Failure in the Adult: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Update the 2001
Guidelines for the Evaluation and Management of Heart Failure): developed
in collaboration with the American College of Chest Physicians and the
International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation: endorsed by the
Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2005;112(12):e154–235.
Marcus GM, Gerber IL, McKeown BH et al. Association between phonocardio-
graphic third and fourth heart sounds and objective measures of left ventric-
ular function. JAMA. 2005;293(18):2238–44.
Miniati M, Prediletto R, Formichi B et al. Accuracy of clinical assessment in the
diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
1999;159(3):864–71.
Oudega R, Moons KG, Hoes AW. Limited value of patient history and physical
examination in diagnosing deep vein thrombosis in primary care. Fam Pract.
2005;22(1):86–91.
Page RL. Clinical practice. Newly diagnosed atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med.
2004;351(23):2408–16.
Qaseem A, Snow V, Barry P et al. Current diagnosis of venous thromboembolism
in primary care: a clinical practice guideline from the American Academy of
Family Physicians and the American College of Physicians. Ann Fam Med.
2007;5:(1):57–62.
Segal JB, Streiff MB, Hofmann LV, Thornton K, Bass EB. Management of venous
thromboembolism: a systematic review for a practice guideline. Ann Intern
Med. 2007;146(3):211–22.
Snow V, Qaseem A, Barry P et al. Management of venous thromboembolism: a clin-
ical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians and the Amer-
ican Academy of Family Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(3):204–10.
Tillie-Leblond I, Marquette CH, Perez T et al. Pulmonary embolism in patients
with unexplained exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease:
prevalence and risk factors. Ann Intern Med. 2006;144(6):390–6.
Stein PD, Willis PW 3rd, DeMets DL. History and physical examination in acute
pulmonary embolism in patients without preexisting cardiac or pulmonary
disease. Am J Cardiol. 1981;47(2):218–23.
Tapson VF. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(10):1037–52.
Wang CS, FitzGerald JM, Schulzer M, Mak E, Ayas NT. Does this dyspneic
patient in the emergency department have congestive heart failure? JAMA.
2005;294(15):1944–56.
Wells PS, Owen C, Doucette S, Fergusson D, Tran H. Does this patient have deep
vein thrombosis? JAMA. 2006;295(2):199–207.
?
15
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mrs. V is 62-year-old woman with leg edema for the past
2 weeks.
What is the differential diagnosis of edema?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Edema is defined as an increase in the interstitial fluid volume and
is generally not clinically apparent until the interstitial volume has
increased by at least 2.5–3 L. It is useful to review some background
pathophysiology before discussing the differential diagnosis:
A. Distribution of total body water
1. 67% intracellular; 33% extracellular
2. Extracellular water: 25% intravascular; 75% interstitial
B. Regulation of fluid distribution between the intravascular and
interstitial spaces
1. There is constant exchange of water and solutes at the
arteriolar end of the capillaries
2. Fluid is returned from the interstitial space to the intravas-
cular space at the venous end of the capillaries and via the
lymphatics.
3. Movement of fluid from the intravascular space to the
interstitium occurs through several mechanisms
a. Capillary hydrostatic (hydraulic) pressure pushes fluid
out of the vessels
b. Interstitial oncotic pressure pulls fluid into the interstitium
c. Capillary permeability allows fluid to escape into the
interstitium
4. Movement of fluid from the interstitium to the intravas-
cular space occurs when opposite pressures predominate
a. Intravascular (plasma) oncotic pressure from plasma
proteins pulls fluid into the vascular space
b. Interstitial hydrostatic pressure pushes fluid out of the
interstitium
5. In skeletal muscle, the capillary hydrostatic pressure and
the intravascular oncotic pressure are the most important.
6. There is normally a small gradient favoring filtration out
of the vascular space into the interstitium; the excess fluid
is removed via the lymphatic system.
C. Edema formation occurs when there is
1. An increase in capillary hydrostatic pressure (for example,
increased plasma volume due to renal sodium retention)
2. An increase in capillary permeability (for example, burns,
angioedema)
3. An increase in interstitial oncotic pressure (for example,
myxedema)
4. A decrease in plasma oncotic pressure (for example,
hypoalbuminemia)
5. Lymphatic obstruction
Although it is possible to construct a pathophysiologic frame-
work (Figure 15–1) for the differential diagnosis of edema, it is
more useful clinically to combine anatomic, pathophysiologic,
and organ/system frameworks:
A. Generalized edema due to a systemic cause and manifested by
bilateral leg edema, with or without presacral edema, ascites,
pleural effusion, pulmonary edema, periorbital edema
1. Cardiovascular
a. Systolic or diastolic dysfunction, or both
b. Constrictive pericarditis
c. Pulmonary hypertension
2. Hepatic (cirrhosis)
3. Renal
a. Advanced renal failure of any cause
b. Nephrotic syndrome
4. Anemia
The most common systemic causes of edema are
cardiac, renal, and hepatic diseases as well as anemia.
5. Nutritional deficiency
6. Medications
a. Antidepressants: Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
b. Antihypertensives
(1) Calcium channel blockers, especially dihydropy-
ridines
(2) Direct vasodilators (hydralazine, minoxidil)
(3) β-Blockers
c. Hormones
(1) Estrogens/progesterones
(2) Testosterone
(3) Corticosteroids
I have a patient with edema.
How do I determine the cause?
248
EDEMA /  249
d. Nonselective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors
e. Rosiglitazone, pioglitazone
8. Refeeding edema
9. Myxedema
B. Limb edema due to a venous or lymphatic cause, manifested
by unilateral or bilateral edema
1. Venous disease
a. Obstruction
(1) Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) (see Chapter 14,
Dyspnea for a full discussion of lower extremity DVT)
(2) Lymphadenopathy
(3) Pelvic mass
b. Insufficiency
2. Lymphatic obstruction (lymphedema)
a. Primary (idiopathic, often bilateral)
(1) Congenital
(2) Lymphedema praecox (onset in puberty) or tarda
(onset after age 20)
b. Secondary (more common, generally unilateral)
(1) Neoplasm
(2) Surgery (especially, following mastectomy)
(3) Radiation therapy
(4) Miscellaneous (tuberculosis, recurrent lymphangi-
tis, filariasis)
C. Localized edema
1. Burns
2. Angioedema, hives
3. Trauma
4. Cellulitis, erysipelas
Figure 15–2 outlines the diagnostic approach to edema. 
1
Mrs. V was well until a couple of months ago when she
began feeling a bit more tired than usual, despite contin-
uing to sleep well. She has had no shortness of breath or
chest pain. She has noted intermittent vague abdominal
pain, not related to eating, position, or bowel movements.
She has been a bit constipated and feels bloated. Over
the last 2 weeks, she has noted swelling in her feet and
lower legs and has not been able to wear her regular
shoes. As she tells you this, you note that she is wearing
house slippers, and that her socks have produced a sig-
nificant indentation above her ankles.
Her past medical history is notable for hypertension
and diabetes, both well controlled. She had a blood trans-
fusion during a cholecystectomy 25 years ago. Her cur-
rent medications include hydrochlorothiazide, lisinopril,
rosiglitazone, simvastatin, and aspirin. She has no his-
tory of heart or kidney disease, or tobacco or alcohol use.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
and what are the active alternatives? What
other tests should be ordered?
Malabsorption
Nephrotic
syndrome
Liver failure
Malnutrition
Lymphedema
(primary and
secondary)
Plasma
oncotic
pressure
Interstitial
hydrostatic
pressure
Capillary
hydrostatic
pressure
Interstitial
oncotic
pressure
Capillary
permeability
Burns
Angioedema
•
•
•
•
Venous obstruction
Cirrhosis
CHF
Constriction/restriction
Renal failure
Pregnancy
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Capillary bed
Artery
Vein
Lymphatics
Precapillary
sphincter
Figure 15–1. Pathophysiology of edema. (Adapted with permission from Cho S et al. Peripheral edema. Am J
Med. 2002;V113:581. Copyright © 2002 Excerpta Medica, Inc.)
250 /  CHAPTER 15
Consider
angioedema/
urticaria, cellulitis,
erysipelas
Acute, unilateral
limb edema
Unilateral/entire limb
Unilateral/localized
Look for history or physical
exam findings suggestive of
Cardiac disease
Liver disease
Renal disease
Anemia
Venous insufficiency
Malnutrition
Oder CBC, liver function tests,
  renal function panel, urine
  albumin/creatinine ratio
Order chest film, ECG, and
  echocardiogram in
  selected patients
Establish etiology if not
  known.
Start or increase diuretics
Begin cause-specific
  treatment
DVT, deep venous thrombosis.
Review medication list
Edema
Bilateral/generalized
Consider cellulitis,
obstruction from
neoplasm,
radiation,
lymphedema
Prescribe compression
stockings
Stop medication if
possible
Duplex
ultrasound
Medication
known to cause
edema?
Signs
of venous
insufficiency?
Active cardiac, hepatic,
renal disease or anemia
identified
No DVT
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Administer
anticoagulant
Shows DVT
Figure 15–2. Diagnostic approach: edema.
EDEMA /  251
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Even before examining Mrs. V, you can see that she has significant
bilateral leg edema, a pivotal point in her presentation. Although
there are some local diseases that can present with bilateral leg
edema, the first step in such patients is always to look for systemic
causes. While the history and physical are often not sensitive or
specific enough to make a diagnosis, they are a good starting point
for organizing the differential. So the first question to ask is, “Does
Mrs. V have any signs or symptoms pointing to a cardiac, hepatic,
or renal cause of her edema?” The answers to this question would
be additional pivotal points. Mrs. V’s history of a blood transfu-
sion puts her at risk for chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis, and her
vague abdominal complaints raise the possibility of ascites, more
commonly seen with cirrhosis than heart failure (HF) or renal fail-
ure. She is certainly at risk for both cardiac and renal disease
because of her history of hypertension and diabetes. While most
patients with heart failure complain of shortness of breath, some
describe only fatigue. Medication should be considered as a cause,
since rosiglitazone frequently causes edema; hypothyroidism does
not cause pitting edema, and so is not likely. Finally, although it is
uncommon for obstruction to cause bilateral edema, you should
think about ovarian cancer causing malignant ascites and venous
obstruction, either via extrinsic compression or due to associated
DVT formation. Table 15–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
Always look for systemic causes of edema in
patients with bilateral leg edema.
1
In general, Mrs. V appears fatigued. Her BP is 100/60 mm
Hg, pulse is 92 bpm, and RR is 16 breaths per minute.
Sclera are anicteric, jugular venous pressure is normal,
and lungs are clear. On cardiac exam, she has a normal S1
and S2, a soft S4, and no S3 or murmurs. Her abdomen is
slightly distended, but soft and nontender; there is a fluid
wave. Her liver is not enlarged, but the spleen is palpable.
Rectal exam shows hemorrhoids and guaiac-negative
stool. She has 2+ edema bilaterally.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Cirrhosis
Textbook Presentation
Patients with cirrhosis can be asymptomatic or have mild symp-
toms, such as fatigue. Some patients have the classic manifesta-
tions of portal hypertension: ascites, edema, variceal bleeding,
encephalopathy, or hypersplenism.
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Most common causes
a. Alcohol
b. Chronic hepatitis B or C 
c. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
d. Hemochromatosis
e. Primary or secondary biliary cirrhosis
2. Less common causes
a. Drugs and toxins (isoniazid, methotrexate, amiodarone)
b. Autoimmune hepatitis
c. Genetic metabolic diseases (Wilson, α1-antitrypsin
deficiency, glycogen storage diseases, porphyria)
d. Infections (schistosomiasis, echinococcosis, brucellosis)
e. Cardiac
The 2 most common causes of cirrhosis in the
United States are alcoholic liver disease and chronic
hepatitis C.
B. Pathophysiology 
1. Advanced fibrosis, or cirrhosis, causes architectural distor-
tion of the hepatic vasculature, leading to shunting of the
blood coming into the liver via the portal vein directly to
the hepatic vein outflow system, which causes
a. Impaired hepatocyte function due to loss of normal
sinusoids
Table 15–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs.V
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Cirrhosis
Hepatitis risk factors
Ultrasound
Ascites
Bilirubin
Spider angiomata
Liver enzymes
Gynecomastia
Prothrombin time
Normal or low JVP
Albumin
Splenomegaly
Liver biopsy 
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Heart failure 
Cardiovascular
ECG
risk factors
Chest radiograph
Dyspnea
Echocardiogram
Elevated JVP
Crackles
S3
Renal disease
Malaise
BUN/creatinine
(insufficiency
Nausea
Urinalysis
or nephrotic
Dyspnea
Albumin/creatinine
syndrome)
Edema
ratio
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Medication
History
History
Other Hypotheses
Ovarian cancer
Abdominal pain
Transvaginal 
or bloating
ultrasound
Increased
CA-125
abdominal girth
Family history
JVP, jugular venous pressure.
252 /  CHAPTER 15
b. Increased intrahepatic resistance, or portal hyperten-
sion
c. Increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma due to
increased regenerative activity
2. Consequences of cirrhosis and portal hypertension include
a. Formation of portosystemic collaterals (ie, varices)
b. Splanchnic vasodilation
c. Renal vasoconstriction and hypoperfusion of the kid-
neys, causing salt and water retention
d. Increased cardiac output
e. Decreased production of albumin and clotting factors
f. Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure resulting in
ascites; hypoalbuminemia and salt and water retention
also contribute to ascites formation
C. Prognosis
1. Risk factors for developing cirrhosis in patients with hep-
atitis C include age over 50, regular alcohol consumption,
and male sex; for those with NAFLD, risk factors include
older age, obesity, insulin resistance, hypertension, and
hyperlipidemia.
2. Decompensation rates are 4%/year for hepatitis C cirrho-
sis and 10%/year for hepatitis B; patients with alcoholic
cirrhosis who continue to drink decompensate rapidly.
3. 5-year mortality approaches 85% after decompensation if
transplantation is not performed.
4. The Childs-Pugh-Turcotte classification of cirrhosis sever-
ity predicts prognosis (see Chapter 17, GI Bleeding).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Cirrhosis is a pathologic diagnosis definitively made only
by examining the entire liver at autopsy or after liver
transplantation.
B. The traditional gold standard is percutaneous liver biopsy,
although due to sampling error, the sensitivity has been
reported to be as low as 70–80%.
C. The clinical presentation is variable, making clinical diagnosis
difficult.
1. Patients may have physical findings suggestive of chronic
liver disease (see below), constitutional symptoms, asymp-
tomatic liver enzyme or radiologic abnormalities, manifes-
tations of portal hypertension (see below), or no symp-
toms at all. Cirrhosis is sometimes diagnosed at autopsy in
patients in whom the disease never manifested.
2. Physical findings associated with chronic liver disease
include
a. Spider angiomata
b. Palmar erythema
c. Dupuytren contracture (alcoholic cirrhosis only)
d. Gynecomastia
e. Testicular atrophy
f. Jaundice
g. Ascites
h. Peripheral edema
i. Hepatomegaly
j. Splenomegaly
k. Caput medusae
l. None of these are sensitive or specific enough to diag-
nose cirrhosis, although multiple findings in combina-
tion do increase the pretest probability of cirrhosis.
3. Patients who show manifestations of portal hypertension
(see below) are assumed to have cirrhosis.
D. Several noninvasive models and techniques have been devel-
oped to predict cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C,
although they are not currently used in place of biopsy.
1. Ultrasound-based elastography, which measures mean
hepatic stiffness (sensitivity 87%, specificity 91% for cirrho-
sis; sensitivity 70% and specificity 84% for advanced fibrosis)
2. AST (SGOT) to platelet ratio index (APRI)
a. (AST level/Upper limit of normal AST) × 100
platelet count
b. For APRI > 0.5, the sensitivity is 81% and specificity
50% for significant fibrosis
c. For APRI > 1, the sensitivity is 76% and specificity
71% for cirrhosis
3. Fibrotest is a commercial product that combines the
results of several assays into a predictive score. 
a. It has a sensitivity of 75% and specificity of 85% for
significant fibrosis.
b. It is 95% accurate in identifying patients with minimal
or no fibrosis. 
E. Test characteristics of ultrasound to diagnose cirrhosis are
variable (LR+, 2.5–11.6; LR−, 0.13–0.73).
F. MRI has sensitivity and specificity as high as 93% and 82%,
respectively.
Treatment 
The treatment of cirrhosis depends on the underlying cause. Treat-
ments for selected causes of cirrhosis are discussed in Chapter 22,
Jaundice and Abnormal Liver Enzymes.
Manifestations of Portal Hypertension
Once it has been determined that the patient probably or defini-
tively has cirrhosis, it is important to determine the specific cause
of the cirrhosis (see Chapter 22, Jaundice and Abnormal Liver
Enzymes) and to determine whether the patient has manifesta-
tions of portal hypertension: variceal bleeding, ascites and its com-
plications, hepatic encephalopathy, and hypersplenism.
1.Variceal Bleeding
See Chapter 17, GI Bleeding.
2. Ascites
Textbook Presentation
The patient complains of an inability to fasten her pants due to
increasing abdominal girth, sometimes accompanied by dyspnea
and edema.
Disease Highlights
A. Epidemiology
1. Ascites develops over 5 years in 30% of patients with com-
pensated cirrhosis, defined as the absence of manifesta-
tions of portal hypertension.
EDEMA /  253
2. 1-year survival rates drop significantly once ascites
develops.
B. Complications of ascites
1. Respiratory compromise due to compression of lung vol-
umes
2. Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS)
a. Diagnostic criteria
(1) Cirrhosis with ascites
(2) Serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL
(3) Serum creatinine stays above 1.5 mg/dL after at
least 2 days of diuretic withdrawal and volume
expansion with albumin
(4) Absence of shock
(5) No current or recent treatment with nephrotoxic
drugs
(6) Absence of parenchymal kidney disease (< 500 mg/day
of proteinuria, < 50 RBC/hpf, abnormalities on
renal ultrasound)
b. Clinical syndromes
(1) Acute renal failure (type 1 HRS): serum creatinine
doubles or increases to > 2.5 mg/dL in less than
2 weeks
(2) Refractory ascites (type 2 HRS): serum creatinine
1.25–2.5 mg/dL with a steady or slowly progres-
sive course
c. Incidence in patients with cirrhosis and ascites is 18%
at 1 year and 39% at 5 years
d. The prognosis is poor (Figure 15–3)
e. Precipitants of type 1 HRS include bacterial infections
(especially spontaneous bacterial peritonitis), GI bleed-
ing, alcoholic hepatitis, overdiuresis, and large volume
paracentesis.
f. HRS is due to peripheral vasodilation which causes
decreased systemic vascular resistance, resulting in
renal arteriolar vasoconstriction, decreased renal blood
flow, and a reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR). 
g. Treatment of HRS
(1) Liver transplantation is the definitive treatment for
both types of HRS.
(2) There are limited data regarding the use of transve-
nous intrahepatic portosystemic shunts (TIPS) and
vasopressin derivatives to treat type 1 HRS.
(3) The treatment of refractory ascites will be discussed
below.
3. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP)
a. Prevalence of 10–30% in hospitalized cirrhotic
patients, with 1-year recurrence rate of 70% and mor-
tality rate of about 20%; 96% of patients with SBP
have a Childs-Pugh-Turcotte grade of B or C
b. Overgrowth of intestinal bacterial and increased intes-
tinal permeability lead to movement of bacteria into
mesenteric lymph nodes; the bacteria can then enter
the systemic circulation and colonize the ascitic fluid.
c. The 3 most common isolates are Escherichia coli, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae, and pneumococci.
d. Symptoms include fever (50–75% of patients), abdomi-
nal pain (27–72%), chills (16–29%), nausea/vomiting
(8–21%), mental status changes (up to 50%), and
decreased renal function (33%); about 13% of patients
are asymptomatic.
e. Risk factors for SBP include ascitic fluid total protein
level ≤1 g/dL, upper GI bleeding, prior episode of SBP
f. Diagnosis of SBP
(1) Criteria for performing a diagnostic paracentesis
in patients with cirrhosis and ascites:
(a) Admission to the hospital 
(b) Change in clinical status (fever, abdominal
pain, mental status changes, ileus, septic shock) 
(c) Development of leukocytosis, acidosis, or renal
failure 
(d) Active GI bleeding
(2) Always inoculate blood culture tubes at the bed-
side to maximize yield of ascitic fluid cultures.
(3) Interpretation of ascitic fluid cell counts and cul-
tures (Table 15–2)
Consider secondary peritonitis if more than 1 organ-
ism is cultured from the ascitic fluid.
(4) Other ascitic fluid findings that increase the likeli-
hood of SBP included WBC count > 1000 cells/
mcL (LR+ = 9.1), pH < 7.35 (LR+ = 9.0), and
blood-ascitic fluid pH gradient ≥0.1 (LR+ = 11)
g. Treatment of SBP
(1) Empiric treatment should be started prior to
return of culture results
(2) IV cefotaxime is the best-studied antibiotic for SBP;
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid has also been studied.
Figure 15–3. Survival in hepatorenal syndrome. (Reproduced,
with permission, from Salerno F et al. Diagnosis, prevention
and treatment of hepatorenal syndrome in cirrhosis. Gut. 2007
Sep; 56(9):1310–18.)
0
0
3
6
Months
Salerno: Gut, Volume 56(9). September 2007.1310–1318
9
12
0.2
0.4
Probability
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cirrhosis with ascites
without HRS
P < 0.01
P < 0.0001
Type 2 HRS
Type 1 HRS
254 /  CHAPTER 15
(3) Intravenous albumin has been shown to reduce
mortality and development of renal impairment.
(4) All patients who recover from SBP should receive
secondary prophylaxis with oral norfloxacin.
(5) Since 2-year survival after SBP is only about 30%,
liver transplantation should be considered in
patients who recover from SBP.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Physical exam: See Chapter 22, Jaundice and Abnormal Liver
Enzymes
B. Peritoneal fluid analysis
1. Serum-ascites albumin gradient
a. In portal hypertension, ascites occurs due to transuda-
tion, without changes in permeability that would allow
albumin to leak into the ascitic fluid.
b. Therefore, the albumin content of ascitic fluid is low
relative to serum.
c. This is in contrast to exudative types of ascites, such as
ascites from infection or malignancy, in which albumin
can leak into the ascitic fluid.
d. A serum-ascites albumin gradient (serum albumin-
ascitic fluid albumin) of ≥1.1 mg/dL has a LR+ of 4.6
for the diagnosis of ascites due to portal hypertension;
a serum ascites-albumin gradient of < 1.1 mg/dL has a
LR−of 0.06 for the diagnosis of portal hypertension.
2. Ascitic fluid total protein
a. Also based on the principle that ascites due to cirrhosis
is transudative and should have a low protein content
relative to serum
b. Using a cut point of 2.5 mg/dL of ascitic fluid total
protein to distinguish an exudate from a transudate
had an accuracy of only 56%.
Serum-ascites albumin gradient is the best test for
distinguishing between ascites due to portal hyper-
tension and ascites due to other causes.
Treatment 
A. Sodium restriction (sodium intake < 2 g/d) is commonly rec-
ommended, but there are no clinical trials showing that it leads
to improved outcomes; fluid restriction of 1000–1500 mL/day
is recommended if the serum sodium is < 130 mEq/L.
B. Spironolactone is the diuretic of choice to treat the aldos-
terone driven salt and water retention seen in cirrhosis.
1. 75% of patients respond
2. Furosemide or other loop diuretics can be added in patients
who do not respond to spironolactone alone; 90% of
patients respond to sodium restricted diets, spironolactone,
and loop diuretics.
3. In order to avoid hypovolemia and renal impairment, the
rate of weight loss should not exceed 0.5 kg/d in the absence
of peripheral edema or 1 kg/d in the presences of edema.
Aspirin and NSAIDs blunt the natriuretic effect of
diuretics and should be avoided in patients with
ascites.
C. Large volume paracentesis with volume expansion (dextran or
albumin) for patients unresponsive to diuretics
D. TIPS
1. Creates a shunt between the high-pressure portal vein and
the low-pressure hepatic vein, leading to improved hemo-
dynamics and a decrease in ascites
2. Complications include bleeding, shunt stenosis or throm-
bosis, right-sided heart failure, and encephalopathy in
30% of patients.
E. Liver transplantation
F. When should ascites be treated with measures beyond sodium
restriction?
1. Not in grade 1 ascites (detectable only by ultrasound)
2. Grade 2 (moderate) and grade 3 (severe) ascites are gener-
ally treated due to patient discomfort and respiratory com-
promise.
a. Grade 2 should be treated with diuretics.
b. Grade 3 should be treated with paracentesis, followed
by diuretics.
3. Refractory ascites (ascites not responsive to maximal toler-
ated medical therapy) should be treated with repeated
paracentesis or TIPS, or both.
3. Encephalopathy
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation of hepatic encephalopathy is a patient with
known cirrhosis who has mental status changes or is in a coma.
Disease Highlights
A. Present in 50–70% of patients with chronic liver disease
B. The clinical manifestations range from subtle abnormalities
detectable only on neuropsychological testing to coma
(Table 15–3).
C. Can be precipitated by a wide variety of insults including
1. Increased ammonia production due to
a. Excess dietary protein
Table 15–2. Interpretation of ascitic fluid results.
Polymorphonuclear
Condition
Count (cells/mcL)
Culture Results
Spontaneous
≥250
Single organism
bacterial peritonitis 
Culture-negative
≥250
Negative
neutrophilic ascites 
Monomicrobial
< 250
Single organism
nonneutrocytic
bacterascites
Secondary bacterial
≥250
Polymicrobial
peritonitis
Polymicrobial
< 250
Polymicrobial
bacterascites
EDEMA /  255
b. Constipation
c. GI bleeding
d. Infection
e. Azotemia
f. Hypokalemia
g. Systemic alkalosis
2. Reduced metabolism of toxins because of hepatic hypoxia
due to
a. Dehydration
b. Arterial hypotension
c. Anemia
3. Increased central nervous depressant effect with use of
benzodiazepines or other psychoactive drugs
4. Reduced metabolism of toxins because diversion of portal
blood, due to surgical or intrahepatic shunts
Always look for the underlying cause of worsening
hepatic encephalopathy.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. There is some correlation between the degree of elevation of
ammonia (either arterial or venous) and the severity of the
encephalopathy, but the ammonia level cannot be used to
determine the presence or absence of hepatic encephalopathy.
B. Diagnosis is based on history and exclusion of other causes of
encephalopathy in a patient with significant liver dysfunction.
Treatment
A. Treatment focuses on reduction of intestinal production of
ammonia.
B. Lactulose removes both dietary and endogenous sources of
ammonia through its cathartic action; it also lowers pH,
which reduces the population of urease-producing bacteria,
and traps ammonia as ammonium ions in the gut lumen.
1. Frequently used in clinical practice, although most studies
showing an improvement in encephalopathy are of poor
quality
2. Daily dose should be titrated to result in 2–4 soft stools/day.
3. Complications include hypovolemia and hypernatremia.
C. Antibiotics reduce the population of urease-producing bacteria.
1. Rifaximin may be superior to lactulose.
2. Neomycin is equivalent to lactulose but has the potential to
cause ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity with long-term use.
D. Consideration of liver transplantation is indicated in patients
with hepatic encephalopathy.
4. Hypersplenism
Textbook Presentation
Cytopenias are found on routine blood testing in a patient with
cirrhosis.
Disease Highlights
A. Splenomegaly is found in 36–92% of patients with cirrhosis;
11–55% have the clinical syndrome of hypersplenism,
defined as the presence of leukopenia or thrombocytopenia
(or both) with splenomegaly.
B. There is a rough correlation between spleen size and degree of
decrease in blood cells.
C. Blood cell abnormalities in liver disease
1. Thrombocytopenia is due to platelet sequestration in the
spleen, impaired bone marrow production, and decreased
platelet survival.
2. Leukopenia is due to sequestration in the spleen and is rare
compared with thrombocytopenia (1 series found 64% of
cirrhotic patients had thrombocytopenia, but only 5%
had leukopenia).
3. Although not part of the syndrome of hypersplenism, ane-
mia often occurs in patients with cirrhosis and is due to
increased destruction in the spleen as well as iron or folate
deficiency; there is also reduced erythropoietin production.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Hypersplenism is a clinical syndrome without a specific set of
diagnostic criteria.
B. Hypersplenism is manifested by splenomegaly and a signifi-
cant reduction in 1 or more cellular elements of the blood, in
the presence of normal or hypercellular bone marrow.
Table 15–3. Grading system for hepatic encephalopathy.
Grade
Level of Consciousness
Clinical Symptoms
Neurologic Signs
EEG Abnormalities
0
Normal
None
None
None 
Subclinical
Normal
Normal
Abnormal neuropsychological testing
None 
1
Sleep-wake reversal,
Forgetfulness, agitation,
Tremor, apraxia, incoordination
Present 
restlessness
irritability, mild confusion
2
Lethargy, slow responses
Disorientation, amnesia,
Asterixis, dysarthria, ataxia,
Present 
inappropriate behavior
hypoactive reflexes
3
Somnolence, confusion
Disorientation, aggressive
Asterixis, hyperactive reflexes, positive 
Present
behavior
Babinski sign, muscle rigidity
4
Coma
Unresponsive
Decerebration
Present
256 /  CHAPTER 15
Treatment
A. Treatment is usually not necessary.
B. Splenectomy or partial splenic embolization is sometimes
done for severe thrombocytopenia with bleeding complica-
tions.
C. Granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
and erythropoietin are rarely used.
D. TIPS does not correct thrombocytopenia.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Initial laboratory test results follow: WBC, 9700/mcL;
Hgb, 10.5 g/dL; Hct, 31%; MCV, 86 mcm3; platelet,
123,000 mcL; electrolytes normal; BUN, 8 mg/dL; creati-
nine, 0.4 mg/dL; glucose, 97 mg/dL; albumin, 2.1 g/dL;
alkaline phosphatase, 95 units/L; total bilirubin, 1.2 mg/dL;
ALT, 102 units/L; AST, 66 units/L; PT/PTT normal; urinal-
ysis, 2+ protein with no cells or casts.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, cirrhosis and portal
hypertension? Have you ruled out the active
alternatives? Do other tests need to be done
to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Mrs. V’s physical exam suggests that she has splenomegaly, ascites,
and edema, without pulmonary findings or an elevated jugular
venous pressure, making HF unlikely. Her laboratory results are
notable for elevation of transaminases and hypoalbuminemia—all
consistent with chronic liver disease. However, the findings of pro-
teinuria and hypoalbuminemia are also consistent with nephrotic
syndrome.
Alternative Diagnosis: Nephrotic Syndrome
Textbook Presentation
Patients with nephrotic syndrome classically have edema (often
periorbital), hypertension, hypoalbuminemia, hyperlipidemia,
and at least 3.5 g/24 hour of proteinuria.
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Primary glomerular diseases
a. Etiology uncertain but probably immune mediated
b. Most common pathologies found in adults are mem-
branous and focal glomerulosclerosis (33% each) 
c. Less common pathologies found in adults are minimal
change disease (15%), IgA nephropathy (10%), and
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (2–5%)
2. There are many systemic diseases associated with nephrotic
syndrome
a. Diabetes is the most common cause in the United States.
b. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) generally causes
an inflammatory nephritis, but sometimes a nonin-
flammatory, membranous pathology.
c. Amyloidosis and multiple myeloma should be consid-
ered in patients over 40.
d. Infections commonly associated with nephrotic syn-
drome include HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, syphilis,
and malaria.
e. Malignancies, especially lung, breast, and colon cancer,
and Hodgkin lymphoma are associated with nephrotic
syndrome; occasionally nephrotic syndrome is the
presentation of the malignancy
f. Many drugs, including NSAIDs, captopril, and heroin,
can cause nephrotic syndrome.
B. Clinical consequences
1. Primary sodium retention by the kidney causes edema and
hypertension.
2. Albumin excretion leads to hypoalbuminemia, which also
contributes to edema formation.
3. Alterations in lipoprotein production and catabolism lead
to elevations of low-density lipoprotein and sometimes
triglycerides.
4. Immunoglobulin excretion causes increased susceptibility
to infection.
5. Thromboembolic complications
a. Due to increased procoagulatory factors and fibrino-
gen, altered fibrinolytic system, urinary loss of
antithrombin III, and increased platelet activity
b. The annual incidence of venous thromboses (eg, renal
vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, DVT) is
1.02%, with an annual incidence of 1.48% for arterial
thromboembolism (ATE); in the first 6 months after
diagnosis, the incidence for venous thromboembolism
(VTE) is 9.85% and for ATE 5.52%.
(1) Risk factors for VTE include serum albumin
< 2.0–2.5 mg/dL, protein excretion > 8 g/24 h;
GFR and traditional risk factors predict ATE
(2) The role of prophylactic anticoagulation is unclear,
but it should be considered in high-risk patients.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Nephrotic syndrome is defined by the presence of urinary
protein excretion of at least 3.5 g/24 hours, measured with
either a 24-hour specimen or a spot albumin/creatinine ratio
> 3000–3500 mcg/mg.
B. Laboratory evaluation should include 
1. CBC 
2. Comprehensive metabolic panel (renal and liver function,
including serum albumin) 
3. Fasting glucose and HbA1c
4. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) 
5. HIV 
6. Hepatitis B serology (surface antigen, core antibody) 
7. Hepatitis C antibody 
8. Serum and urine protein electrophoresis
C. Renal biopsy is often necessary.
Treatment
A. Loop diuretics are used to treat the edema; high doses are often
needed due to the primary sodium retention by the kidney.
EDEMA /  257
B. ACE inhibitors reduce proteinuria in both hypertensive and
normotensive patients.
1. The antiproteinuric effect becomes maximal in 28 days.
2. The effect can be increased by a low-salt diet, diuretic
treatment, or both.
3. Proteinuria is further reduced when an angiotensin recep-
tor blocker is added to the ACE inhibitor.
C. Corticosteroids and other immunosuppressives are used in
selected patients.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mrs. V’s hepatitis C antibody is positive, with negative
hepatitis B serologies. Her total cholesterol is 145 mg/dL,
and her 24-hour urinary protein excretion is 1.4 g. An
abdominal CT scan demonstrates a small, nodular liver;
splenomegaly; and ascites. You schedule an esopha-
gogastroduodenoscopy to screen for varices, start
spironolactone because of the discomfort she is having
from the edema, and refer her to a hepatologist.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mrs. E is a 62-year-old woman with a long history of
hypertension that is well controlled with hydrochloroth-
iazide, atenolol, and amlodipine. She comes in today with
a new complaint of swelling in her legs and feet for sev-
eral weeks. It is generally most noticeable late in the day
and is often absent when she first gets up in the morn-
ing. She has no history of liver or kidney disease or alco-
hol use. She has no chest pain and no shortness of
breath, although notes she finds it tiring to climb stairs
or walk more than a few blocks. She smoked a few ciga-
rettes a day for 20 years, but quit 20 years ago.
Her physical exam is notable for a BMI of 38, clear
lungs, an S4 with no S3 or murmurs, and a normal
abdomen. Her legs show 1+ edema to the knees bilater-
ally. She has a long-standing goiter that is unchanged
from previous exams. It is difficult to identify her jugular
venous pressure due to the shape of her neck.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL
Once again, given the pivotal finding of bilateral edema, the first
step is to look for systemic causes, focusing first on cardiac,
hepatic, and renal causes. Mrs. E’s long-standing history of hyper-
tension raises the possibility of diastolic dysfunction, and the lack
of physical exam findings does not rule this out. There are no clin-
ical clues to suggest liver or kidney disease, but these are easy to
test for and should always be ruled out. Amlodipine commonly
causes edema, but she has taken it for years without symptoms.
“Dependent edema,” edema that is worsened by standing and
improves or resolves with leg elevation, is consistent with, but not
specific for, venous insufficiency. A final consideration would be
pulmonary hypertension. Patients with pulmonary hypertension
commonly complain of dyspnea in addition to edema, and the
tired feeling she experiences with exertion could represent dysp-
nea. Additionally, she is overweight, putting her at risk for
obstructive sleep apnea and consequent pulmonary hypertension.
Table 15–4 lists the differential diagnosis.
2
Initial laboratory test results include BUN, 15 mg/dL; cre-
atinine, 0.9 mg/dL; albumin/creatinine, ratio 5 mcg/mg;
normal liver enzymes, albumin, and prothrombin time.
The ECG and chest radiograph are normal. An
echocardiogram shows normal left ventricle size and func-
tion, elevated pulmonary pressures consistent with mod-
erate pulmonary hypertension (estimated mean PAP
40 mm Hg), mild tricuspid regurgitation, and normal right
ventricular size and function.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
There is no evidence of renal disease, liver disease, or diastolic dys-
function. However, the echocardiogram shows the somewhat
unexpected finding of pulmonary hypertension. This necessitates
revising the original set of diagnostic hypotheses: the leading
hypothesis is now pulmonary hypertension, and venous insuffi-
ciency is the remaining active alternative.
Leading Hypothesis: Pulmonary Hypertension
Textbook Presentation
Patients commonly complain of long-standing dyspnea that pro-
gresses over months or years. Syncope, exertional chest pain, and
edema occur with more severe pulmonary hypertension and
impaired right heart function. 
Disease Highlights
A. Definition
1. The normal mean pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) is
12 mm Hg.
258 /  CHAPTER 15
2. Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean PAP > 25 mm
Hg, with a mean pulmonary arterial occlusion pressure
< 15 mm Hg; severe pulmonary hypertension is defined as
a mean PAP of at least 50 mm Hg.
B. Pathophysiology: the increased pulmonary vascular resistance
is due to 3 factors:
1. Vascular remodeling with vascular inflammation and
endothelial cell proliferation
2. Platelet dysfunction and thrombosis
3. Vasoconstriction due to 2 factors
a. Endothelial dysfunction resulting in overproduction of
vasoconstrictors such endothelin-1 and underproduc-
tion of vasodilators such as nitric oxide, prostacyclin,
and vasoactive intestinal peptide
b. Abnormal voltage-gated potassium channels
C. The clinical classification was revised in 2003 and is organized
using a pathophysiologic framework
1. Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
a. Idiopathic PAH
b. Familial PAH
c. PAH associated with
(1) Collagen vascular disease (especially scleroderma,
SLE, and mixed connective tissue disease)
(2) Congenital systemic-pulmonary shunts
(3) Portal hypertension (1–6% of patients)
(4) HIV infection (0.5% of patients)
(5) Drugs or toxins (dexfenfluramine or fenfluramine
containing appetite suppressants, amphetamine,
methamphetamine, cocaine)
d. PAH associated with significant venous or capillary
involvement (pulmonary veno-occlusive disease or cap-
illary hemangiomatosis)
2. Pulmonary hypertension with left heart disease (ventricu-
lar, atrial, valvular)
3. Pulmonary hypertension associated with lung disease or
hypoxemia
a. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
b. Interstitial lung disease
c. Sleep disordered breathing
d. Alveolar hypoventilation
e. Chronic exposure to high altitude
4. Pulmonary hypertension due to chronic thromboembolic
disease (proximal or distal pulmonary arteries)
5. Miscellaneous (sarcoidosis; compression of pulmonary ves-
sels due to adenopathy, tumor, fibrosing mediastinitis)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. In 1 series of patients with PAH, initial symptoms included
dyspnea (60%), fatigue (19%), chest pain (7%), syncope
(8%), edema (3%).
2. At the time these patients were given the diagnosis of PAH
and were enrolled in the study, 98% had dyspnea, 73%
fatigue, 47% chest pain, 36% syncope, 37% edema, and
33% palpitations.
B. Physical exam
1. Characteristic findings include 
a. An accentuated pulmonary component of S2
b. Sustained left lower parasternal movement 
c. An early systolic click 
d. Increased jugular a and v waves 
e. Tricuspid regurgitation murmur 
f. Hepatojugular reflux 
g. Pulsatile liver 
h. Elevated jugular venous pressure 
i. Edema 
2. Sustained left lower parasternal movement for detecting a
mean PAP > 50 mm Hg: sensitivity, 71%; specificity, 80%;
LR+, 3.6; LR−, 0.4
3. A palpable P2 for detecting a mean PAP > 50 mm Hg
(studied in patients with mitral stenosis): sensitivity, 96%;
specificity, 73%; LR+, 3.6; LR−, 0.05
C. ECG
1. Expected findings include right axis deviation, right ven-
tricular hypertrophy, and P-pulmonale pattern (right atrial
enlargement).
2. Not sensitive or specific enough to diagnosis pulmonary
hypertension (sensitivity, 51%; specificity, 86%; LR+, 3.6;
LR−, 0.56)
D. Chest film
1. Expected findings include enlargement of pulmonary
arteries and right ventricular enlargement.
Table 15–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. E.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Diastolic
History of 
Echocardiogram 
dysfunction
hypertension
Dyspnea
Edema
Elevated JVP
S3
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Venous
Dependent edema
Physical exam
insufficiency
Varicose veins
Duplex 
Typical skin changes 
ultrasound
(see description below)
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Renal and
See Table 15–1
See Table 15–1
liver disease
Other Hypotheses
Pulmonary
Dyspnea, often 
Echocardiogram
hypertension
long-standing
Right heart 
Edema
catheterization
Syncope
JVP, jugular venous pressure.
EDEMA /  259
2. Not sensitive or specific enough to diagnose pulmonary
hypertension (sensitivity, 46%; specificity, 63%)
E. Transthoracic echocardiogram
1. Most common noninvasive way to estimate pulmonary
pressure
2. Echocardiogram estimates often correlate fairly well with
invasively determined PAPs, but differences as large as 38 mm
Hg have been reported in individual patients.
3. Sensitivity ranges from 79% to 100%.
4. Specificity ranges from 60% to 98%.
F. Right heart catheterization is the gold standard for diagnosing
pulmonary hypertension, and all patients with suspected pul-
monary hypertension need a right heart catheterization to con-
firm the finding.
Treatment
A. Depends on underlying etiology
B. Correct underlying cause when possible
1. For obstructive sleep apnea, administer continuous posi-
tive airway pressure.
2. For chronic thromboembolism, begin anticoagulation and
consider thromboendarterectomy.
3. For valvular disease, replace the valve.
4. For congenital heart disease, repair surgically.
5. For left ventricular dysfunction, optimize medical regimen.
C. Oxygen therapy for patients with hypoxemia (PO2 < 55 mm
Hg at rest, oxygen saturation < 85% with exercise)
D. Most patients require loop diuretics.
E. Most medication trials showing improvement in hemody-
namics and/or exercise capacity have included patients with
idiopathic, fenfluramine-associated, and connective tissue dis-
ease–associated pulmonary hypertension 
1. Currently available drugs include oral endothelin antago-
nists such as bosentan, oral phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors
such as sildenafil, and prostacyclins such as epoprostenol
(parenteral) or iloprost (inhaled). 
2. Calcium blockers are effective in a few patients.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mrs. E has a normal physical exam, ECG, and chest radi-
ograph, normal right ventricular function on echocardio-
gram, and the isolated finding of moderately elevated
PAP seen on an echocardiogram. The echocardiogram
estimate of PAP alone is not specific enough to make the
diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension, and Mrs. E has no
other findings supporting the diagnosis of pulmonary
hypertension. Furthermore, Mrs. E’s dyspnea is minimal,
suggesting that she has neither significant pulmonary
hypertension nor pulmonary disease.
You explain the puzzling finding to Mrs. E. She does not
want to undergo a right heart catheterization to verify the
PAP. She reports that she is able to walk a mile every morn-
ing without shortness of breath, and that her edema is most
noticeable when she has been on her feet for a long time.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, pulmonary hyperten-
sion? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis:Venous Insufficiency
Textbook Presentation
Venous insufficiency can be asymptomatic or manifested just by
small visible, but nonpalpable veins. In more severe cases, the
patient has large varicose veins and skin changes ranging from
edema to fibrosing panniculitis to ulceration. Symptoms include
leg fullness or heaviness, aching leg pain, and nocturnal leg cramps.
Disease Highlights
A. Anatomy (Figure 15-4)
1. The superficial saphenous veins join the deep system at
the knee (popliteal vein) and the groin (femoral vein).
2. Perforating veins directly connect the saphenous veins and
the deep veins at various points along their parallel courses.
3. Valves within the veins prevent reflux back toward the feet.
B. Pathophysiology and epidemiology
1. Chronic venous disease is due to venous hypertension
caused by reflux through incompetent valves, venous out-
flow obstruction, or lack of calf muscle pumping due to
obesity or immobility.
Figure 15–4. Anatomy of the superficial venous system.
Epigastric
vein
Great
saphenous vein
(superficial system)
Femoral vein
(deep system)
Sapheno-
femoral
junction
260 /  CHAPTER 15
a. Reflux occurs in the superficial system in about 45% of
patients, both the superficial and deep systems in about
40%, and in the deep system only in the remainder of
patients
b. Prolonged standing leads to marked increases in venous
pressure in all people; while those with competent
valves quickly lower the venous pressure with walking,
individuals with incompetent valves have only slight
decreases in pressure with walking.
2. Varicose veins are found in 25–33% of women and
10–20% of men.
3. Prevalence of skin changes is 3–11%; prevalence of skin
ulcers is 0.3–1%.
4. Risk factors for venous insufficiency include advancing age,
obesity, a history of phlebitis or venous thrombosis, serious
leg trauma, pregnancy, prolonged standing, and greater
height.
5. Postthrombotic syndrome (venous insufficiency after a
DVT) occurs in 35–69% of patients at 3 years and in
49–100% of patients at 5–10 years; incidence is reduced
to 8% if patients are treated with adequate anticoagula-
tion, early mobilization, and long-term use of compression
stockings.
C. Classification
1. Class 1: telangiectasias or reticular veins (nonpalpable sub-
dermal veins up to 4 mm in diameter)
2. Class 2: varicose veins (palpable, subcutaneous veins > 4 mm
in diameter)
3. Class 3: edema without skin changes
a. Initially present just at the end of day but can become
persistent and massive
b. Can be unilateral initially
c. Often begins around medial malleolus
4. Class 4: skin changes
a. Pigmentation due to breakdown of extravasated
RBCs
b. Stasis dermatitis: itching, weeping, scaling, erosions, and
crusting
c. Lipodermatosclerosis or fibrosing panniculitis
(1) Induration initially at medial ankle, spreading cir-
cumferentially round the entire leg, up to mid calf
(2) The skin is heavily pigmented and fixed to subcu-
taneous tissues, with brawny edema above the
fibrosis and in the foot below
(3) High risk for cellulitis
5. Classes 5 and 6: healed or nonhealed ulcers
a. Usually low on the medial ankle or along the path of
the long or short saphenous vein
b. Never above the knee or on the forefoot
c. Chronic and recurrent, often lasting for months or
even years
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is often made based on the appearance of the
leg.
B. Venography is the gold standard.
C. Duplex ultrasonography is the best noninvasive test.
1. Should be done if the diagnosis is in doubt (especially to
rule out DVT), in patients with atypical symptoms or pre-
sentations, or if surgery is being considered
2. For diagnosing valvular incompetence, the sensitivity is
84%, specificity is 88%, LR+ = 7, and LR−= 0.18.
3. For diagnosing severe venous insufficiency, the sensitivity
is 77%, specificity is 85%, LR+ = 5.1, and LR−= 0.26.
D. Because many patients have both arterial and venous insuffi-
ciency, concurrent arterial disease must be ruled out with the
ankle brachial index (ABI).
Treatment 
A. Compression stockings are the most important treatment
modality.
1. Have been shown to reduce risk of postthrombotic syn-
drome, to accelerate ulcer healing, and to prevent recurrent
ulceration
2. Classified into several grades, based on degree of compres-
sion at the ankle
a. 20–30 mm Hg: for patients with varicose veins,
edema, leg fatigue (Classes 2 and 3)
b. 30–40 mm Hg: for patients with severe varicosities or
moderate disease (Classes 4–6)
c. 40–50 mm Hg: for patients with recurrent ulceration
3. Knee high stockings are better tolerated than thigh high
stockings.
4. Compliance often poor due to skin irritation, discomfort,
and difficulty putting on the stockings.
Compression stockings should not be used in
patients with peripheral arterial disease or with inva-
sive infection at an ulcer site.
5. Alternative ways to provide compression include elas-
tic wraps and intermittent pneumatic compression
pumps.
6. Ulcers should be covered with a dressing before putting on
the compression device.
B. Diuretics are ineffective for the edema unless given with com-
pression therapy.
C. Treatment of venous insufficiency ulcers
1. Occlusive dressing
2. Leg elevation and compression
3. Aspirin, 325 mg daily, might accelerate healing.
4. Pentoxifylline might accelerate healing.
5. Topical antibiotics have no role.
6. Systemic antibiotics indicated only if cellulitis or other
invasive infection is present.
D. Interventional therapies
1. Sclerotherapy for spider veins, venous lakes, varicose veins
1–4 mm in diameter
2. Endovenous radiofrequency ablation and laser: alternative
to vein stripping for great saphenous vein reflux
3. Iliac vein stenting for venous outflow abnormalities
4. Vein stripping and ligation
EDEMA /  261
a. Usually involves removing the saphenous vein with
high ligation of the saphenofemoral junction
b. Shown to result in significant improvement in symp-
toms in patients with Class 2–6 disease
c. Surgery plus compression is better than compression
alone for preventing ulcer recurrence (12% combined
therapy vs. 28% compression alone).
CASE RESOLUTION
2
You decide that Mrs. E’s symptoms are more consistent
with venous insufficiency than with pulmonary hypertension.
Duplex ultrasonographic scans confirm valvular incompe-
tence, and you recommend that Mrs. E wear compression
stockings. She returns in 3 months reporting that she has
no edema when she wears the stockings, and that she con-
tinues to walk 1 mile daily without any dyspnea. 
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mrs. K is a 64-year-old woman who had a right mastec-
tomy 2 years ago for breast cancer. She was treated
with adjuvant radiation therapy and has been taking
tamoxifen since completing the radiation. She has had no
evidence of recurrent disease but has had some right
arm swelling for at least 18 months. She comes to see
you now because 2 days ago the swelling of her right arm
worsened, with associated pain and redness. This morn-
ing her temperature was 37.9°C.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL
Mrs. K has chronic lymphedema due to disruption of her lym-
phatic drainage by her previous surgery and radiation therapy. This
is a pivotal point in her history since patients with lymphatic dis-
ruption and lymphedema are at high risk for skin and subcuta-
neous infections. Pathophysiologically, the edema found in celluli-
tis is due to a localized increase in capillary permeability due to
inflammation; however, patients with underlying limb abnormali-
ties will often present with more diffuse edema. The other primary
consideration in any patient with unilateral limb swelling is DVT.
Mrs. K has several risk factors for this, including history of cancer,
possible venous scarring secondary to radiation, and use of tamox-
ifen (a drug associated with a relative risk for DVT of about 3).
Table 15–5 lists the differential diagnosis.
Always think about DVT in a patient with unilat-
eral limb swelling.
3
On physical exam, Mrs. K is clearly uncomfortable. Her
temperature is 38.3°C, pulse 102 bpm, RR 16 breaths 
per minute, and BP 125/80 mm Hg. Her right upper arm
and chest are bright red, hot, and tender. The border of
the erythema is sharply demarcated, and the area of ery-
thema feels indurated. She has eczema of all of her fin-
gers, with multiple areas of cracked skin.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Cellulitis & Erysipelas
Textbook Presentation
A painful, red, hot, and swollen limb develops acutely in a patient
with underlying venous or lymphatic disease.
Table 15–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. K.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Cellulitis 
Edema
Clinical exam
or erysipelas
Erythema
Pain
Fever
Entry site for infection
Underlying venous
insufficiency or
lymphedema
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Upper
Unilateral arm/neck 
Duplex ultrasound
extremity DVT
swelling
CT
Feeling of fullness
MRA
or heaviness
Venography
DVT risk factors
(especially indwelling
intravenous catheter)
DVT, deep venous thrombosis.
262 /  CHAPTER 15
Disease Highlights
A. Definitions
1. Cellulitis is an infection of the dermis and subcutaneous
tissue.
2. Erysipelas is a superficial cellulitis with prominent lymphatic
involvement.
B. Cellulitis highlights
1. Risk factors for the development of cellulitis
a. Lymphedema
b. Peripheral edema 
c. Venous insufficiency
d. Obesity
e. Diabetes
f. History of cellulitis
g. Breast cancer treatment 
(1) Cellulitis of the ipsilateral arm is seen in women in
whom lymphedema of the arm develops after mas-
tectomy.
(2) Cellulitis of the ipsilateral breast is seen in women in
whom localized lymphedema develops after lumpec-
tomy, axillary node dissection, and radiation therapy.
2. Often an entry site for infection can be identified (leg ulcer,
trauma, tinea pedis, eczema, subcutaneous abscess)
3. Clinical presentation
a. Presence of systemic symptoms (eg, fever, chills, myal-
gias) is unusual and suggest concomitant bacteremia or
a more serious infection such as necrotizing fasciitis.
b. Physical findings
(1) Nonpalpable, confluent erythema with indistinct
margins
(2) Generalized swelling
(3) Warmth and tenderness of involved skin
(4) Tender regional adenopathy sometimes found
(5) Lymphangitis and abscess formation sometimes seen
(6) In women who have been treated for breast cancer
and have arm lymphedema, the humeral area of
the ipsilateral extremity is most often involved,
with extension to the shoulder and forearm.
(7) In breast cellulitis, the infection starts at the
lumpectomy site and can extend to the remainder
of the breast, the anterior shoulder, back, and ipsi-
lateral upper extremity.
4. Microbiology
a. β-Hemolytic streptococci and Staphylococcus aureus are
the most common organisms.
(1) Community-acquired methicillin-resistant S
aureus (MRSA), usually the USA300 genotype, is
increasingly common; it is now the most common
pathogen cultured from skin and soft tissue infec-
tions in urban emergency departments
(2) The following groups are at risk for having com-
munity-acquired MRSA:  
(a) Household contacts 
(b) Soldiers 
(c) Children 
(d) Men who have sex with men 
(e) Incarcerated persons 
(f) Athletes 
(g) Native Americans, Pacific Islanders
(h) Injection drug users
(i) Patients with a previous community-acquired
MRSA infection
(3) Many patients with community-acquired MRSA
have none of these risk factors
(4) Skin abscesses, often with central necrosis, are a very
common manifestation of community-acquired
MRSA; patients often think they have been bitten
by a spider or other insect.
(5) Other manifestations include cellulitis, necrotizing
pneumonia, pleural empyema, necrotizing fasci-
itis, septic thrombophlebitis, myositis, and severe
sepsis
b. A variety of other organisms may be seen with specific
exposures or sites of infection (Table 15-6)
C. Erysipelas highlights
1. Risk factors for development of erysipelas
Table 15–6. Microbiology of cellulitis.
Cellulitis 
Location/
Likely 
Syndrome
Key Point
Organisms
Periorbital
Periorbital
Staphylococcus aureus,
pneumococcus,
group A streptococcus
(GAS)
Orbital
Emergent because
Staphylococcus,
of potential to affect
streptococcus
oculomotor function
and visual acuity
Perianal
Evaluate for
GAS
underlying abscess
Breast cancer
See text
Non-group A hemolytic
treatment
streptococcus
Saphenous
Ipsilateral leg
GAS or non-group A
vein harvest
streptococcus
Injection drug
Extremities, neck
Staphylococcus,
use
streptococcus
(groups A, C, F, G),
gram-negative
organisms, anaerobes 
Crepitant
Trunk, extremities;
GAS, anaerobes,
cellulitis 
consider necrotizing
Clostridia
fasciitis
Salt water
Exposed body part
Vibrio vulnificus
exposure
Fresh water 
Exposed body part
Aeromonas hydrophilia
exposure
Hot tub exposure
Bathing suit
Pseudomonas 
distribution
aeruginosa
EDEMA /  263
a. Similar to those for cellulitis
b. Lymphedema and an identified portal of entry (pri-
marily tinea pedis) are the 2 strongest risk factors in
1 study.
Always treat tinea pedis in a patient with cellulitis,
erysipelas, or risk factors for developing those
infections.
2. Clinical presentation
a. Sudden onset of fever (85% of patients), erythema,
edema, and pain
b. Physical findings
(1) Palpable plaque of erythema that extends by
2–10 cm/day
(2) Sharply demarcated border
(3) Leg is the most common site (90%), then the arm
(5%), and then the face (2.5%).
(4) Regional adenopathy and lymphangitis sometimes
seen
c. Recurrence rate of 10% at 6 months and 30% at 3 years
is usually due to untreated local factors.
d. Patients should respond to antibiotic therapy in
24–72 hours.
3. Microbiology
a. Streptococci are the causative organisms in 90% of
cases (group A in about 58–67% of cases caused by
streptococci, group B in 3–9%, and group C or G in
14–25%)
b. S aureus is also found in 10% of cases, although it is
unclear whether it is contributing to the infection or
just colonizing.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Both cellulitis and erysipelas are clinical diagnoses.
B. Blood cultures are positive in 2–5% of patients.
C. Skin biopsy cultures are positive in 5-40% of patients, but are
rarely necessary. 
D. Aspiration of the leading edge of erythema is sometimes done,
but the yield is low.
E. Toe web cultures are sometimes helpful in patients with tinea
pedis.
F. If there is a skin abscess associated with the cellulitis, it should
be drained and the fluid cultured.
Cultures are rarely helpful in cellulitis or erysipelas
without an associated abscess.
Treatment 
A. Cellulitis
1. Initial therapy is usually empiric.
2. Must cover staphylococcus and streptococcus
3. Purulent cellulitis is more likely to be caused by S aureus;
nonpurulent cellulitis is often due to a combination of
staphylococci and streptococci.
4. Because of the emergence of community-acquired MRSA,
antibiotics previously used for cellulitis (such as cephalexin
or dicloxicillin) may not be effective.
a. Local susceptibility patterns can guide choices.
b. Oral drugs to which community-acquired MRSA is
commonly sensitive include clindamycin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, and tetracyclines.
(1) Streptococci are often resistant to trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole and tetracyclines.
(2) 10–20% of MRSA isolates that are sensitive to
clindamycin, but resistant to erythromycin,
develop inducible clindamycin resistance due to
the presence of the erm gene.
(3) Clindamycin sensitive/erythromycin resistant iso-
lates should undergo the “D-Zone Test” to look for
inducible resistance (Figure 15–5).
5. A reasonable choice for cellulitis would be clindamycin or
a β-lactam antibiotic (such as dicloxicillin or amoxi-
cillin/clavulanate) plus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
6. Should treat for 10–14 days
B. Erysipelas
1. Penicillin G or amoxicillin is effective in > 80% of patients
with erysipelas.
2. Other drugs that have been studied include macrolides
and fluoroquinolones
3. Should treat for 10–20 days
C. Uncomplicated, slowly progressive infection in a well-appear-
ing patient can be treated with oral antibiotics if
Figure 15–5. D-Zone test.
S aureus
growth
Erythromycin
No S aureus
growth
Clindamycin 
When there is inducible clindamycin resistance, the zone
of clindamycin inhibition is blunted on the side next to
the erythromycin disk, resulting in a “D” shaped area of no 
growth surrounding the clindamycin disk. If there is no 
inducible resistance, the no growth area around the 
clindamycin disk will be a more symmetric circle 
264 /  CHAPTER 15
1. The patient has no GI upset
2. The limb can be elevated
3. Serial exams are feasible
D. Patients who appear ill, who have rapidly progressive infec-
tion, are immunocompromised, or who might not be able to
follow treatment instructions should be admitted for IV
antibiotics, generally including vancomycin.
E. Obtain infectious disease and surgical consultations for patients
with rapidly progressive infections, especially if progression
occurs while they are receiving appropriate antibiotics.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
Initial laboratory tests include the following: WBC
11,700/mcL, 83% PMNs, 10% basophils, 7% lymphocytes;
Hgb, 13.5 g/dL; glucose, 88 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.8 mg/dL.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, cellulitis or erysipelas?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Upper Extremity
DVT (UEDVT)
Textbook Presentation
Patients can be asymptomatic, but generally arm, shoulder, or
neck discomfort or fullness as well as arm swelling are the pre-
senting symptoms.
Disease Highlights
A. Classification
1. Primary UEDVT (20% of cases)
a. Idiopathic
b. Effort thrombosis, also known as Paget-Schroetter syn-
drome
(1) Occurs in young men after strenuous exercise,
which causes microtrauma to the veins
(2) May or may not find compression by hypertro-
phied muscles or a cervical rib
2. Secondary UEDVT (80% of cases) (Table 15–7)
a. Indwelling central venous catheter–associated UEDVT
(up to 70% of cases)
(1) UEDVT occurs more often with large catheters
than with smaller ones.
(2) Risk increases with duration of catheter use, being
negligible within 6 days and increasing signifi-
cantly after 2 weeks.
(3) Risk is higher with polyvinyl chloride-coated
catheters than with silicone ones.
b. Malignancy (> 40% of cases); patients with cancer and
an indwelling catheter are at especially high risk.
c. Hypercoagulable states
d. Other miscellaneous causes (surgery, infection, immo-
bility, concurrent lower extremity DVT)
B. Sites
1. Subclavian in 18–69% of cases
2. Axillary in 5–42% of cases
3. Internal jugular in 8–29% of cases
4. Brachial in 4–13% of cases
5. Multiple veins are often involved, but bilateral UEDVT
is rare.
C. Clinical features
1. Pain is present in ~40% of patients.
2. Edema is present ~80% of patients in some series, but
patients with catheter-related UEDVT often do not have
edema.
3. Patients may note numbness, heaviness, paresthesias, pru-
ritus, and coldness.
4. Dilated cutaneous veins sometimes visible.
D. Complications
1. Pulmonary embolism occurs in up to 36% of cases and is
more often seen with secondary UEDVT, especially
catheter-related.
UEDVT can cause pulmonary embolism.
2. Recurrent thrombosis occurs in up to 10% of patients.
3. Postthrombotic syndrome is seen in up to 4–34% of patients
in different series.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Venography is the gold standard.
B. Duplex ultrasonography is the most commonly used nonin-
vasive test.
1. Disadvantages include a blind spot caused by the clavicle and
difficulties interpreting the study if there are collateral veins.
Table 15–7. Risk factors for upper extremity deep venous
thrombosis.
Adjust Odds Ratio
Risk Factor
(95% CI)
Indwelling central venous catheter (CVC)
9.7 (7.8–12.2)
CVC plus inherited coagulation disorder
~30
Cancer
18.1 (9.4–35.1)
Metastatic vs localized cancer
11.5 (1.6–80.2)
Cancer plus CVC
43.6 (25.5–74.6)
Oral contraceptives plus factor V Leiden
13.6 (2.7–67.3)
or prothrombin G20210A mutation
Upper extremity surgery
13.1 (2.1–80.6)
Upper extremity plaster cast
7.0 (1.7–29.5)
EDEMA /  265
2. Sensitivity ranges from 56% to 100%, and specificity from
94% to 100%
3. Magnetic resonance angiography and CT are sometimes
done; sensitivity and specificity are unknown.
Treatment
A. Anticoagulation with heparin, followed by at least 3 months
of warfarin; patients with cancer or chronic indwelling central
venous catheters should receive anticoagulation therapy
indefinitely.
B. Thrombolysis with or without stent placement is sometimes
done, especially in patients who require permanent indwelling
catheters.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mrs. K’s presentation of a sharply demarcated, erythe-
matous plaque, fever, and leukocytosis is diagnostic of
erysipelas. The portal of entry is the eczematous, cracked
skin on her hands. Although she has some risk factors for
UEDVT, it is not necessary to test for it at this point.
Because of the extent of infection, Mrs. K is admitted to
the hospital and treated with IV cefazolin. One of 2 blood
cultures grows group A β-hemolytic streptococci. She
improves rapidly and is switched to oral penicillin and is
discharged.
REFERENCES
Angeli P, Merkel C. Pathogenesis and management of hepatorenal syndrome in
patients with cirrhosis. J Hepatol. 2008;28:S93–S103.
Baarslad HJ, van Beek EJR, Koopman MMW, Reekers JA. Prospective study of
color duplex ultrasonography compared with contrast venography in
patients suspected of having deep venous thrombosis of the upper extremi-
ties. Ann Intern Med. 2002;136:865–72.
Bergan JJ, Schmid-Schonbein GW, Smith PD, Nicolaides AN, Boisseau MR,
Eklof B. Chronic venous disease. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:488–98.
Bernardi E, Pesavento R, Prandoni P. Upper extremity deep venous thrombosis.
Semin Thromb Hemost. 2006;32:729–36.
Bonnetblanc JM, Bedane C. Erysipelas. Am J Clin Dermatol. 2003;4:157–63.
Chin KM, Rubin LJ. Pulmonary arterial hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol.
2008;51:1527–38.
Daum RS. Skin and soft tissue infections caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylo-
coccus aureus. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:380–90.
Eberhardt RT, Raffetto JD. Chronic venous insufficiency. Circulation.
2005;111:2398–2409.
Madaio MP, Harrington JT. The diagnosis of glomerular diseases. Arch Intern
Med. 2001;161:25–34.
Mahmoodi BK, ten Kate MK, Waanders F et al. High absolute risks and predictors
of venous and arterial thromoboembolic events in patients with nephrotic
syndrome: results from a large retrospective cohort study. Circulation.
2008;117:224–30.
McGee S. Evidence based physical diagnosis. W.B. Saunders; 2001:435, 457.
McGoon M, Gutterman D, Steen V et al. Screening, early detection, and diagno-
sis of pulmonary hypertension. Chest. 2004;126:14S–34S.
Mustafa BO, Rathbun SW, Whitsett TL, Raskob GE. Sensitivity and specificity of
ultrasonography in the diagnosis of upper extremity deep vein thrombosis.
Arch Intern Med. 2002;162:401–4.
Rich S, Dantzker Dr, Ayres SM et al. Primary pulmonary hypertension: a national
prospective study. Ann Intern Med. 1987;107:216–23.
Rogers RL, Perkins J. Skin and soft tissue infections. Primary Care: Clinics in
Office Practice. 2006;33:697–710.
Schuppan D, Afdhal NH. Liver cirrhosis. Lancet. 2008;371:838–51.
Sheer TA, Runyon BA. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Dig Dis. 2005;23:39–46.
Swartz MN. Cellulitis. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:904–12.
Wong CL et al. Does this patient have bacterial peritonitis or portal hypertension?
JAMA. 2008;299:1166–78.
?
16
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mrs. M is a 42-year-old woman who has had fatigue for
the past 6 months.
What is the differential diagnosis of fatigue?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Before considering the differential diagnosis, it is important to
understand what the patient means by fatigue, which is con-
ventionally defined as a sensation of exhaustion after usual
activities, or a feeling of insufficient energy to begin usual
activities. Most people consider the terms fatigue, tiredness,
and lack of energy synonymous. However, patients sometimes
use these terms when they are actually experiencing other
symptoms, especially excessive sleepiness, weakness, or dyspnea
on exertion.
Always ask patients what they mean when they
report fatigue. Always ask directly about weakness,
excessive sleepiness, and dyspnea.
Acute fatigue is common in conjunction with a variety of acute ill-
nesses, ranging from uncomplicated viral infections to exacerbations
of heart failure (HF). Fatigue is also a prominent symptom in some
chronic diseases, such as multiple sclerosis and cancer. This chapter
will not discuss fatigue in such patients but will focus on evaluating
the symptom of fatigue lasting weeks to months in patients without
already diagnosed conditions known to cause fatigue.
The differential diagnosis of fatigue is extremely broad and best
organized with an organ/system approach.
A. Psychiatric
1. Depression
2. Anxiety
3. Somatization disorder
4. Substance abuse
B. Sleep disorders
1. Insomnia
2. Obstructive sleep apnea
3. Periodic leg movements
4. Narcolepsy
C. Endocrine
1. Thyroid disease
2. Diabetes
3. Hypoadrenalism
D. Medications (Table 16–1)
E. Hematologic or oncologic
1. Anemia
2. Cancer
F. Renal: renal failure
G. GI: liver disease
H. Cardiovascular: chronic heart disease
I. Pulmonary: chronic lung disease
J. Neuromuscular: myositis, multiple sclerosis
K. Infectious: chronic infections
L. Rheumatologic: autoimmune diseases
M. Fatigue of unknown etiology
1. Chronic fatigue syndrome
2. Idiopathic chronic fatigue: fatigue for which no medical,
psychiatric, or sleep pattern explanation can be found.
Figure 16-1 outlines the evaluation of fatigue in an algorithm.
The most common causes of fatigue are psychiatric
disorders, sleep disorders, and medication side effects.
1
Mrs. M reports that she is tired all the time, beginning
first thing in the morning and lasting all day. She also
reports frontal headaches several mornings per week,
intermittent lower abdominal pain relieved by bowel move-
ments, and low back pain. She does not complain of any
trouble sleeping.
Her past medical history is notable for menorrhagia
and iron deficiency anemia when she was in her 20s and
is otherwise unremarkable. Currently, her menses occur
every 30 days, with bleeding for 3–4 days. Her family his-
tory is notable for thyroid disease in her mother and
breast cancer in her paternal grandmother.
She takes no medications, does not smoke, and does
not drink alcohol. She has never used illicit drugs. She
works as a teacher, and her husband is a security guard.
They have 2 children, ages 9 and 12.
I have a patient with fatigue.
How do I determine the cause?
266
FATIGUE /  267
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
A specific causative medical disease that explains fatigue is found in
less than 10% of patients who seek medical attention from their pri-
mary care physician. Up to 75% of patients with fatigue have psy-
chiatric symptoms. Sleep disorders are also common in patients with
fatigue, and in one referral clinic, 80% of patients with fatigue had
sleep disorders. Patients with several somatic complaints, such as
Mrs. M, are particularly likely to have psychiatric causes for fatigue,
as are patients who feel tired constantly. Because sleep disorders are
so common, either in association with psychiatric disorders or alone,
they are always an active alternative in patients with fatigue. Patients
often do not spontaneously describe sleep disturbances and psychi-
atric symptoms, so it is important to ask about them directly.
All patients with fatigue need a detailed psychoso-
cial and sleep history.
Although most patients with fatigue do not have anemia,
hypothyroidism, or diabetes, they are important and treatable, and
so are generally considered “must not miss” diagnoses. Anemia and
hypothyroidism are somewhat likely in Mrs. M because of her pre-
vious history of anemia and her family history of thyroid disease.
Finally, on occasion, fatigue may be the presenting symptom in
patients with surprisingly severe cardiac, pulmonary, renal, or liver
disease. Table 16–2 lists the differential diagnosis.
Despite the rarity of positive results, most patients
with fatigue need basic laboratory testing consisting
of a blood count, chemistry panel (including glu-
cose, electrolytes, BUN, creatinine, and liver func-
tion tests), and TSH.
1
Mrs. M does not lack interest in her usual activities or
feel depressed. She has not lost or gained weight. She
worries about money and her family but has never had a
panic attack and does not consider herself excessively
nervous or anxious.
On physical exam, she appears healthy and her affect
is normal. HEENT exam is normal. There is no thy-
romegaly or adenopathy. Lungs are clear. There are no
breast masses. Cardiac and abdominal exams are nor-
mal, and there is no edema. Her CBC, glucose, elec-
trolytes, BUN, creatinine, liver function tests, and TSH
are all normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypotheses: Depression & Anxiety
See Chapter 27, Involuntary Weight Loss.
Table 16-1. Medications that affect sleep.
Medications that cause insomnia
Antihypertensives: Clonidine, methyldopa, reserpine, propranolol, atenolol
Anticholinergics: Ipratropium
CNS stimulants: Methylphenidate
Hormones: Oral contraceptives, thyroid hormone, corticosteroids, progesterone
Sympathomimetic amines: Albuterol, theophylline, phenylpropanolamine, pseudoephedrine
Antineoplastics: Leuprolide, goserelin, pentostatin, interferon alfa
Miscellaneous: Phenytoin, nicotine, levodopa, quinidine, caffeine, alcohol
Medications that cause drowsiness
Tricyclic antidepressants: Amitriptyline, imipramine
Opioids
Benzodiazepines
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Anticonvulsants: Gabapentin
Alcohol
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mrs. M does not meet DSM criteria for anxiety or depres-
sion. It is therefore necessary to consider the alternative
diagnoses.
Mrs. M works as a teacher, rising at 6 AM, leaving her
house at 7 AM, and returning home about 5 PM. She then
prepares dinner for her family, helps her 2 children with
their homework, and grades papers until 9:30 PM. She
watches a little television, and then goes to sleep about
10:00 PM. Her husband works from 3 PM to 11 PM, and she
often wakes up when he gets home at midnight. He needs
268 /  CHAPTER 16
Fatigue
Symptoms of
depression, anxiety?
OR
Abnormal CBC, TSH?
OR
Previously undiagnosed diabetes; advanced
HF, COPD, liver or
kidney disease?
Treat and
reevaluate
Yes
Evaluate for sleep
disorder with
detailed sleep
habits history
No
OSA risk factors/
symptoms?
Elderly, RLS, nocturnal
leg movements?
Polysomnogram
Yes
Polysomnogram
Yes
Primary or
secondary
insomnia
No
No
Cognitive/
behavioral and/or
pharmacologic
therapy
Consider
polysomnogram if
no improvement
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HF, heart failure; OSA, obstructive sleep apnea;
RLS, restless legs syndrome.
Figure 16-1. Diagnostic approach: fatigue.
FATIGUE /  269
some time to “wind down” before he goes to sleep, so they often
talk and watch TV in bed for an hour or so. After her husband
dozes off, she often cannot fall back asleep, and will sit in bed
“surfing” the Internet on her laptop for an hour or two.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make a
diagnosis? If not, what other information do
you need?
Table 16-2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. M.
Diagnostic Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypotheses
Depression
History of loss
History
Prior depression
Postpartum state
Family history
> 6 somatic symptoms
Positive depression screen
Anxiety
Multiple somatic symptoms
History
Anxiety
Panic attacks
Active Alternatives—Most Common  
Insomnia
Fatigue
History
Sleep apnea
Daytime sleepiness
Polysomnogram
Periodic limb movements
Daytime sleepiness
History
Restless leg syndrome
Polysomnogram
Narcolepsy
Sudden episodes of daytime sleep
Multiple sleep latency test
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Anemia
Fatigue
CBC
Dyspnea
Symptoms of blood loss
Hypothyroidism
Fatigue
TSH
Constipation
Cold intolerance
Diabetes
Family history
Fasting plasma glucose
Obesity
Hypertension
Ethnic group
Polyuria
Polydipsia
Other Hypotheses
Advanced renal disease
Fatigue
BUN
Anorexia
Creatinine
Nausea
Edema
Advanced liver disease
Fatigue
AST (SGOT)
Anorexia
ALT (SGPT)
Nausea
Bilirubin
Edema
Advanced cardiac disease
Dyspnea
ECG
Orthopnea
Echocardiography
PND
Stress test
Edema
Advanced pulmonary disease
Dyspnea
Pulmonary exam
Cachexia
Pulmonary function tests
Chest radiograph
270 /  CHAPTER 16
Revised Leading Hypothesis: Insomnia
Textbook Presentation
Patients with insomnia sometimes have trouble falling asleep,
sometimes fall asleep easily but wake up during the night, or both.
Disease Highlights
A. Primary insomnia
1. Pathogenesis unknown, but may be due to a state of hyper-
arousal (demonstrated on positron emission tomography
(PET) scans and by measurements of adrenal hormones)
2. Three types
a. Idiopathic: arises in childhood; persistent
b. Psychophysiologic 
(1) Due to a maladaptive response in which the patient
associates the bed environment with arousal rather
than sleep
(2) Often begins due to a precipitant of acute insom-
nia, such as a death of a family member, but per-
sists after the precipitant resolves
c. Paradoxical: a mismatch between the patient’s percep-
tion of the duration of sleep and objective findings on
polysomnography
B. Secondary insomnia
1. Adjustment insomnia: associated with active psychosocial
stressors
2. Inadequate sleep hygiene: associated with lifestyle habits
than impair sleep
3. Due to an active psychiatric disorder, such as anxiety or
depression
4. Due to a medical condition, such as chronic pain, dysp-
nea, cough, hot flashes
5. Due to a drug or substance, such as alcohol, caffeine, med-
ication, or an illicit drug
C. Although not officially considered insomnias, other disorders
such as shift-work sleep disorder (seen in patients whose work
shift varies), and delayed sleep phase syndrome (a delay in
sleep period of > 2 hours relative to conventional times)
should also be considered in patients with insomnia.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Obtaining a thorough history helps establish the diagnosis of
insomnia. Initial screening questions include the following:
1. Difficulty initiating sleep, staying asleep, or both?
2. Early awakening?
3. Non-restorative sleep?
4. Daytime consequences? (Lack of daytime fatigue or sleepi-
ness suggests the insomnia is not clinically significant.)
5. Frequency and duration?
B. Follow-up questions
1. Precipitating events, progression, ameliorating or exacer-
bating factors?
2. Sleep-wake schedule?
3. Cognitive attitude toward sleep?
a. Negative expectations regarding the ability to sleep and
distortions about the effects of insomnia lead to per-
petuation of the insomnia.
b. Attitudes toward previous treatments are also important.
4. Psychiatric disorder present?
5. Substance misuse or medication use?
6. Medical illness with nocturnal symptoms?
7. Symptoms of sleep apnea, restless legs? (See discussion
below.)
Treatment 
A. Behavioral therapy
1. Stimulus control therapy
a. Also known as sleep hygiene
b. Based on premise that insomnia is a conditioned
response to temporal and environmental cues
c. Has been shown to be effective for sleep onset and
maintenance
d. Principles of sleep hygiene
(1) Go to bed only when sleepy.
(2) Use the bedroom only for sleep and sex, not read-
ing, watching television, eating, or working.
(3) If unable to sleep after 20 minutes in bed, get out
of bed, go into another room, read or listen to
quiet music, and then return to bed when sleepy.
(4) Maintain a consistent sleep-wake schedule; go to
bed and get up at the same time each day.
(5) Avoid daytime napping; if napping is necessary,
limit the nap to less than 30 minutes and take the
nap no later than the early afternoon.
(6) Avoid caffeine, alcohol, and other stimulants (such
as decongestants).
(7) Exercise regularly, but not in the late evening.
2. Relaxation therapy
a. Methods include progressive muscle relaxation,
biofeedback to reduce somatic arousal, imagery train-
ing, and meditation.
b. Useful for both sleep onset and maintenance
c. Often requires practice with a trained professional
3. Sleep restriction therapy
a. Decreases the amount of time spent in bed in order
to increase the percentage of time in bed spent
sleeping
b. Usually keep waking time constant and make bedtime
later, with progressive moving up of bedtime as sleep
improves
c. Effective for sleep onset and maintenance
B. Cognitive therapy involves identifying dysfunctional beliefs
about sleep and then substituting more functional attitudes
that can reduce anxiety.
C. Combination therapy: combining cognitive and behavioral
therapy has been shown to be superior to relaxation therapy
alone.
D. Pharmacotherapy
1. Most studies of pharmacologic agents are short (12
days to 6 months), so data about long-term effects are
lacking.
2. Basic principles for using pharmacotherapy to treat chronic
insomnia
a. Use agents with shorter half-lives to minimize daytime
sedation.
FATIGUE /  271
b. Use the lowest effective dose.
c. Try to dose intermittently, such as 2–4 times per week,
rather than daily.
d. Try to limit daily use to a maximum of 3–4 weeks.
e. Discontinue medication gradually.
f. Monitor for rebound insomnia when medications are
stopped.
4. Categories of medications (Table 16–3)
a. Benzodiazepines
(1) Effective in initiating and maintaining sleep
(2) Efficacy may decrease with duration of adminis-
tration, although one 8-week study of temazepam
did not demonstrate any tolerance.
(3) Can develop marked rebound insomnia lasting
1–3 nights when triazolam is stopped; intermediate
acting benzodiazepines cause only mild rebound
insomnia, and rebound is rare with long duration
benzodiazepines. 
(4) Side effects (daytime drowsiness, cognitive impair-
ment, and potential for delirium) are all greater
with longer-acting drugs and are more common in
elderly patients.
b. Benzodiazepine receptor agonists
(1) Nonbenzodiazepine compounds that bind to only
1 type of benzodiazepine receptor
(2) Zolpidem, zaleplon, and eszopiclone are effective
in initiating sleep; zolpidem is possibly more effec-
tive than zaleplon in maintaining sleep.
(3) Because of its extremely short half-life, zaleplon
can be taken during the night.
(4) No tolerance, dependence, or rebound insomnia
has been reported.
(5) Little or no daytime drowsiness
(6) No evidence of cognitive impairment with zale-
plon; zolpidem may cause mild impairment.
(7) Zolpidem can be used intermittently (3–5 times/
week) in patients with chronic insomnia.
c. Antihistamines
(1) Should not be used as sleeping aids due to minimal
effectiveness and impairment of sleep quality.
(2) Daytime drowsiness is common.
(3) Commonly cause delirium in elderly patients
d. Antidepressants
(1) Trazodone is frequently used for sleep; limited data
suggest that trazodone is better than placebo but
inferior to zolpidem.
(2) Low-dose tricyclic antidepressants, such as amitripty-
line, are sometimes used; one 4-week study of dox-
epin showed beneficial effects on sleep latency and
total sleep time.
(a) Elimination half-lives are long, often leading
to daytime sedation.
(b) Potential for anticholinergic side effects, even
at low doses
E. Pharmacologic therapy versus cognitive behavioral therapy
1. Data comparing pharmacotherapy with behavioral and
cognitive therapy are limited.
a. Overall, treatment effects are similar.
b. Perhaps more rapid improvement with pharmacotherapy
c. Perhaps more sustained improvement with behavioral
therapy
2. Studies of combined cognitive behavioral and pharmaco-
logic therapy versus cognitive behavioral therapy alone
show that the cognitive behavioral therapy alone group
maintained results at 10–24 months, but the combined
group did not.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mrs. M is reassured that her laboratory tests are nor-
mal. She realizes that she often gets 6 hours of sleep or
less a night. After listening to you explain the principles
of sleep hygiene, she decides to talk with her husband
about ways they could spend time together without
interrupting her sleep so often.
When she returns 6 months later, she reports that
she is still tired because she values the time she spends
with her husband at night. However, she now asks him to
sleep in the guest room when she feels exceptionally
fatigued, so she can have a few nights of uninterrupted
sleep. She has also found that a 15-minute nap at
lunchtime helps.
Table 16-3. Medications used to treat insomnia.
Half-life of 
Dose range
drug and active 
Medication
(mg)
metabolites (hrs)
Benzodiazepines
Triazolam1
0.125–0.25
2–5
Temazepam1
7.5–30
8–15
Estazolam1
0.5–2
10–24
Lorazepam  
0.5–4
8–24
Clonazepam 
0.5–2
19–60
Benzodiazepine receptor agonists (BZRAs)
Zaleplon1
5–20
1
Zolpidem1
5–10
3
Eszopiclone1
1–3
5–7
Melatonin receptor agonist
Ramelteon1
8
2–5
Miscellaneous
Diphenhydramine 
25–50 mg
2.4–9.3
Trazodone 
25–100
5–9
1Approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for treatment of insomnia.
272 /  CHAPTER 16
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
Textbook Presentation
Patients with OSA often complain of daytime sleepiness or
fatigue. Bed partners often note snoring or actual apneic episodes.
Most patients are obese.
Disease Highlights
A. Present in up to 24% of men and 9% of women
B. An obstructive apnea is at least 10 seconds of cessation of ven-
tilation; a hypopnea is at least a 30% reduction in air flow for
10 seconds or longer with at least a 4% reduction in oxygen
saturation.
C. The apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) is the total number of
apneas plus hypopneas per hour.
1. OSA is defined as an AHI ≥5 with daytime somnolence,
or an AHI ≥15 regardless of symptoms.
2. Mild OSA is an AHI of 5–14; moderate is an AHI of
15–30, and severe is an AHI > 30.
D. Pathophysiology 
1. There are normal decreases in tonic pharyngeal muscle
tone and compensatory reflex dilators during sleep.
2. Patients with OSA have smaller upper airways due to
increased parapharyngeal fat, tongue prominence, elon-
gated palate, or thickened lateral pharyngeal walls, and are
unable to maintain airway stability.
3. During inspiration, the negative upper airway pressures close
these narrowed airways, resulting in apneas or hypopneas.
E. Risk factors
1. Obesity
a. A 1 SD increase in body mass index (BMI) is associated
with 4.5-fold increased risk of OSA.
b. Visceral and truncal fat, and neck circumference corre-
late more with OSA than BMI alone.
2. Smoking (RR = 3).
3. Nighttime nasal congestion is associated with OSA (RR =
1.8).
4. Anesthesia, sedative/hypnotic medications, and sleep dep-
rivation can promote apneic episodes.
F. Consequences of OSA
1. Increased rate of motor vehicle accidents (RR = 2.5)
2. Hypertension (RR = 2.89); some studies have shown a
reduction in BP of 10 mm Hg when OSA is treated.
3. HF (RR = 2.38); treatment of OSA in patients with HF
improves left ventricular ejection fraction by 5–8%.
4. Atrial fibrillation is twice as likely to recur after cardiover-
sion in patients with untreated OSA.
5. An association with impaired glucose tolerance has been
observed.
6. Long-standing, severe OSA can lead to cor pulmonale.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. The complaint of sleepiness has traditionally been thought
to suggest the diagnosis of an intrinsic sleep disorder.
2. One study of patients with OSA showed that patients
more often reported fatigue, tiredness, or lack of energy
than sleepiness.
a. When patients were asked to choose 1 of these symp-
toms, they chose lack of energy most often.
b. Severity of sleep apnea did not correlate with choice of
symptom terminology.
3. Since no 1 historical or physical exam finding can reli-
ably predict OSA, several clinical decision rules have
been developed, but none is widely used in clinical
practice.
B. Polysomnography
1. Records electroencephalogram, electromyelogram, ECG,
heart rate, respiratory effort, airflow, and oxygen satura-
tion during sleep
2. Gold standard for diagnosis of OSA
3. One study found a sensitivity of 66% for the first night
study in patients who underwent 2 consecutive night
studies; the sensitivity increased by 25% after the second
night.
4. The more severe the OSA, the less variability in the night-
to-night polysomnogram results.
Treatment
A. Risk factor modification
1. Weight loss, smoking cessation, avoiding alcohol before
bedtime
2. A 10% weight loss leads to a 25% reduction in the AHI.
B. Nasal therapies (external dilator strips, internal nasal dilators,
lubricants): limited data, generally not sufficient treatment
C. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
1. Pneumatically splints the upper airway throughout the
respiratory cycle
2. The pressure must be determined during polysomnogra-
phy (a “CPAP titration”) and is set to eliminate, or at least
reduce, apneas and hypopneas.
3. Has been shown to reduce symptoms, and improve both
hypertension and heart failure
D. Oral appliances
1. Designed to advance the mandible, pulling the tongue for-
ward and opening the pharyngeal airway
2. Not consistently effective
E. Surgery
1. Uvulopalatoplasty (UPPP)
a. Excision of the uvula, part of the soft palate, and tonsils
b. Significant postoperative pain and the potential for
nasal reflux and voice changes
c. < 50% of patients achieve an AHI < 10
d. Sometimes combined with maxillomandibular
advancement, which has been effective in 60% of the
patients reported
2. Laser and radiofrequency ablation of the oropharyngeal
tissues not effective 
3. Tracheostomy, which is curative, is sometimes neces-
sary for patients with severe OSA who cannot tolerate
CPAP.
FATIGUE /  273
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)
Textbook Presentation
The patient complains of daytime sleepiness or fatigue, and the
bed partner complains that the patient is very restless, even kick-
ing the bed partner.
Disease Highlights
A. Periodic episodes of repetitive and stereotyped limb move-
ments occurring during non-REM sleep, generally consisting
of big toe extension in combination with partial flexion of the
ankle, knee, and hip.
B. The movements recur at regular intervals of 20–40 seconds
and cause arousal, although the patient is usually unaware. 
C. Rare in persons younger than 30 years; found in 5% of per-
sons aged 30–50, and in 44% of persons older than 65 years.
D. Primary cause of insomnia in 17% of patients
E. Can be unmasked after successful treatment of OSA
F. Accompanied by restless leg syndrome (RLS) in 25% of
patients
1. Diagnostic criteria for RLS 
a. The urge to move the legs, accompanied by uncom-
fortable or unpleasant sensations, often described as
“creeping” or “crawling”  
b. Worsening of symptoms when inactive 
c. Partial symptom relief with movement 
d. Presence of symptoms only in the evening or at night,
or worsening of daytime symptoms in the evening
2. Found in 2–15% of the general population, and 10–35%
of patients over 65
3. Accompanied by PLMD in 85% of cases
4. Can be primary or secondary to iron deficiency anemia,
renal failure, or peripheral neuropathy
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. PLMD is diagnosed by polysomnography
B. RLS is a clinical diagnosis
Treatment of PLMD
Effective medications include dopamine agonists (pramipexole or
ropinirole) and clonazepam.
Hypothyroidism 
Textbook Presentation
Patients with hypothyroidism commonly complain of fatigue,
constipation, or cold intolerance.  
Disease Highlights 
This discussion focuses on primary hypothyroidism in nonpreg-
nant adults.
A. Epidemiology
1. Prevalence of overt hypothyroidism is 0.1–2% (see below
for a discussion of subclinical hypothyroidism)
2. Prevalence increases with age 
3. 10 times more common in women than men
B. Etiology
1. Primary hypothyroidism: failure of the thyroid gland to
produce adequate thyroid hormone
a. Most common cause in iodine sufficient areas is chronic
autoimmune (Hashimoto) thyroiditis
(1) Both cell-mediated and antibody-mediated destruc-
tion of the thyroid gland
(2) Autoantibodies against thyroid peroxidase, thy-
roglobulin, and TSH receptor
(3) Patients may or may not have a goiter on presen-
tation
b. Iodine deficiency is a common cause worldwide;
patients have large goiters
c. Thyroidectomy or radioactive iodine therapy both
cause hypothyroidism
(1) Patients with partial thyroidectomy may not need
replacement but should be monitored annually
(2) Postablative hypothyroidism develops several
weeks after the radioactive iodine therapy
d. Can develop years later in patients who have under-
gone external neck radiation 
e. Amiodarone and lithium commonly cause hypothy-
roidism
f. Less common etiologies include infiltrative diseases,
such as sarcoidosis, and thyroid agenesis
2. Central hypothyroidism: reduction in TSH due to pitu-
itary or hypothalamic disorder
a. Pituitary adenoma is the most common cause
b. Granulomatous diseases, especially sarcoidosis, can
infiltrate the hypothalamus
C. Clinical manifestations
1. Metabolic: Decreased metabolism that can lead to weight
gain, cold intolerance, and increased total and LDL cho-
lesterol (due to decreased clearance)
2. Cardiac: Reduction in myocardial contractility and heart rate
3. Skin: Nonpitting edema, due to accumulation of gly-
cosaminoglycans; dry skin; coarse, fragile hair
4. CNS: fatigue, delayed relaxation phase of the deep tendon
reflexes
5. Pulmonary: hypoventilation seen with severe hypothyroidism
6. GI: reduced intestinal motility causes constipation
7. Reproductive: menstrual abnormalities, reduced fertility,
increased risk of miscarriage.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism all lack sensitiv-
ity and specificity.
B. The TSH is the best screening test for both primary hypothy-
roidism and hyperthyroidism; it is not necessary to measure
thyroid hormone levels initially unless central hypothyroidism
is suspected.
C. If the TSH is normal, no further testing is necessary.
D. If the TSH is elevated, the free T4 or free thyroxine index
(FTI) should be ordered next.
1. Most of T4 is bound to thyroxine-binding globulin and
albumin.
274 /  CHAPTER 16
2. The levels of these binding proteins are affected by a vari-
ety of medical conditions, thus altering the level of total T4.
3. Free T4 better reflects the patient’s thyroid function than
total T4; free T4 can be measured directly or can be calcu-
lated and is then called the FTI.
To assess thyroid function, order a TSH followed by
a measurement of free T4; do not order a total T4
(TT4).
E. If the TSH is elevated, and the free T4 is decreased, the patient
has overt hypothyroidism and should be treated.
F. If the TSH is elevated and the free T4 is normal, the patient
may have subclinical hypothyroidism.
1. The TSH and free T4 should be repeated to confirm the
diagnosis.
2. The most common cause is chronic autoimmune
(Hashimoto) thyroiditis.
3. The overall prevalence is 4–8% but is up to 20% in
women over 60.
4. The progression rate to overt hypothyroidism is 2–5%/
year; patients with higher levels of TSH and positive thy-
roid antibodies are more likely to progress.
5. It is not clear whether subclinical hypothyroidism leads to
symptoms or cardiovascular consequences, and there is lit-
tle or no evidence that treating subclinical hypothyroidism
improves patient well being.
Treatment
A. Overt hypothyroidism
1. All patients should be treated with levothyroxine (T4).
2. The full replacement dose is 1.6 mcg/kg/day, but in older
patients or those with underlying coronary disease, it is
preferable to start with a lower of dose of 25–50 mcg/day.
3. Levothyroxine is best absorbed on an empty stomach,
with a 40% reduction in absorption if taken with food;
calcium, iron, antacids, proton pump inhibitors, and anti-
convulsants also interfere with absorption.
4. The half-life of levothyroxine is 7 days, so steady state con-
centration is reached in about 6 weeks.
5. The TSH level should be checked 6 weeks after every dose
adjustment, with the goal of increasing the dose until the
TSH is within the normal range. 
6. Once the dose is stable, it is sufficient to check the TSH
annually.
B. Subclinical hypothyroidism
1. Experts agree that patients with a TSH > 10 mcU/mL
should be treated; some experts would also treat patients
with positive thyroid antibodies.
2. There is controversy regarding treating patients with
mildly elevated TSH levels (< 10 mcU/mL); if the patient
has symptoms consistent with hypothyroidism, it is rea-
sonable to prescribe a several month trial of levothyroxine
with monitoring of symptoms.
REFERENCES
Devdhar M, Ousman YH, Burman KD. Hypothyroidism. Endocrinol Metab Clin
North Am. 2007;36:595–615.
Neubauer DN. Insomnia. Prim Care. 2005;32:375–88.
Olson EJ, Park JG, Morgenthaler TI. Obstructive Sleep Apnea-Hypopnea Syn-
drome. Prim Care. 2005;32:329–59.
Pang KP, Terris DJ. Screening for obstructive sleep apnea: an evidence-based analy-
sis. Am J Otolaryngol. 2006;27:112–18.
Sateia MJ, Nowell PD. Insomnia. Lancet. 2004;364:1959–73.
Silber MH. Chronic insomnia. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:803–10.
Surks MI, Ortiz E, Daniels DH, et al. Subclinical thyroid disease. JAMA.
2004;291:228–38.
White DP. Sleep apnea. Proc Am Thorac Soc. 2006;3:124–28.
Wolkove N, Elkholy O, Baltzan M, Palayew M. Sleep and aging: sleep disorders
commonly found in older people. CMAJ. 2007;176:1299–1304.
?
18
287
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. M is a 34-year-old man who comes to an outpatient
practice complaining of intermittent headaches.
What is the differential diagnosis of headache?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Headache is one of the most common physical complaints.
Because less than 1% of all headaches are life-threatening, the chal-
lenge is to reassure and treat patients with benign headaches appro-
priately while finding the rare, life-threatening headache without
excessive evaluation.
Headaches are classified as primary or secondary. Primary
headaches are syndromes unto themselves rather than signs of other
diseases. Although potentially disabling, they are reliably not life-
threatening. Secondary headaches are symptoms of other illnesses.
Unlike primary headaches, secondary headaches are potentially
dangerous.
The distinction of primary and secondary headaches is useful
diagnostically. Primary headaches are diagnosed clinically, sometimes
using diagnostic criteria (the most commonly used are published by
the International Headache Society, IHS). Traditional diagnostic
studies cannot verify the diagnosis. Secondary headaches often can
be definitively diagnosed by recognizing the underlying disease.
Clinically, primary and secondary headaches can be difficult to
distinguish. The single most important question when developing a
differential diagnosis for a headache is, “Is this headache new or old?”
Chronic headaches tend to be primary, while new-onset headaches
are usually secondary. This is the first and most important pivotal
point in diagnosing headaches. This distinction is not perfect. There
are some chronic headaches that are secondary headaches and even
classic, primary headaches (such as migraines) can present as a new
headache. The differentiation of old versus new also depends on how
rapidly a patient brings his or her symptoms to medical attention.
This being said, the following breakdown provides a clinically useful
way of organizing headaches.
A. Old headaches
1. Primary
a. Tension headaches
b. Migraine headaches
c. Cluster headaches
2. Secondary
a. Cervical degenerative joint disease
b. Temporomandibular joint syndrome
c. Headaches associated with substances or their withdrawal
(1) Caffeine
(2) Nitrates
(3) Analgesics (often presenting as chronic daily
headaches)
(4) Ergotamine
B. New headaches
1. Primary
a. Benign cough headache
b. Benign exertional headache
c. Headache associated with sexual activity
d. Benign thunderclap headache
e. Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor
cerebri)
2. Secondary
a. Infectious
(1) Upper respiratory tract infection
(2) Sinusitis
(3) Meningitis
b. Vascular
(1) Temporal arteritis
(2) Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)
(3) Parenchymal hemorrhage
(4) Malignant hypertension
(5) Cavernous sinus thrombosis
c. Space occupying lesions
(1) Brain tumors
(2) Subdural hematoma
d. Medical morning headaches
(1) Sleep disturbance
(2) Night-time hypoglycemia
1
Mr. M reports similar headaches for 10 years. He comes
in now because while they used to occur 2–3 times a year,
they have become more frequent, occurring 3–4 times a 
(Continued)
I have a patient with headache.
How do I determine the cause?
month. The headaches are so severe that he is unable to 
work while experiencing one. He describes them as a
throbbing pain behind his right eye. (When describing the
headache, he places the base of his hand over his eye
with his fingers wrapping over his forehead.) The
headaches are often associated with nausea and, in the
last few months, he has occasionally vomited with them.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis. Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The severity and chronicity of the headaches are pivotal points in
this case. Although Mr. M’s headaches are terribly severe, they have
to be classified as old headaches since they have been occurring for
years. This fact is reassuring, meaning that his headaches are most
likely a primary headache. In a young healthy person with chronic
headaches, migraines and tension headaches are most likely. Given
the severity of the headaches, migraines are more likely than tension
headaches. Given the severe, throbbing nature of the headaches, a
vascular cause should at least be considered. An intracranial
aneurysm could cause similar symptoms, but the chronicity makes
this less likely. Table 18–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
Severity is less important than quality in distin-
guishing a new headache from an old headache. A
severe headache that is identical in quality to chronic
headaches is less worrisome than a mild headache
that is dissimilar to any previous headache.
1
Mr. M has used ibuprofen in the past with good response,
but this is no longer working well. His past history is
remarkable only for severe car-sickness as a child.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not what other information
do you need? 
Leading Hypothesis: Migraine Headaches
Textbook Presentation
Migraines most often first present in women in their teens or 20s.
The headaches are unilateral and throbbing and are severe enough to
make it impossible to do work during an attack. They are occasion-
ally preceded by about 20 minutes of flickering lights in a visual field
(aura). Patients usually find it necessary to lie in a dark, quiet room.
Disease Highlights
A. The description of migraine headaches adopted by the IHS is,
“Recurring headache disorder manifesting in attacks lasting
4–72 hours. Typical characteristics of headache are unilateral
location, pulsating quality, moderate or severe intensity,
aggravation by routine physical activity and association with
nausea, and/or photophobia and phonophobia.”
B. Migraine headaches are a chronic headache syndrome caused
by a neurovascular disorder. Neural events lead to intracranial
vasodilatation.
C. They may begin at any age but most commonly begin during
adolescence.
D. They are 2–3 times more common in women than men.
E. Auras frequently accompany migraines.
1. Somewhere between 33% and 75% of patients with
migraines have auras. Of all people with migraine,
a. 18% always have auras
b. 13% sometimes have auras
c. 8% have auras without headaches.
2. Auras are usually visual, precede the headache, and last for
about 20 minutes.
3. Descriptions of auras
a. Frequently, patients will initially describe a blind spot.
b. Auras usually involve 1 portion of the visual field.
c. Auras may vary. The frequency of some types of aura is
given in Table 18–2.
d. Scintillating scotoma often occur. These are often
described as flashing lights, spots of light, zigzag lines, or
squiggles.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Migraine headaches are among the most severe of all the
recurrent headache syndromes. (Cluster headaches are the
other primary headache that causes severe pain.)
1. They should be considered in any patient with headaches
severe enough to be the chief complaint at a doctor visit.
288 /  CHAPTER 18
Table 18–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. M.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Migraine headache
Moderate to severe,
Diagnostic criteria 
unilateral throbbing
and exclusion of 
headache, sometimes
secondary 
associated with aura
headaches
Active Alternative—Most Common
Tension headache
Chronic, pressure-type
Diagnostic criteria 
headache of mild to
and exclusion of 
moderate intensity
secondary
headaches
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Intracranial aneurysm
Acute or subacute
CT scan
headache
MR angiography
Headache features
or traditional 
are nonspecific
angiography
HEADACHE /  289
2. Of initial visits for headaches in the primary care setting,
90% meet criteria for migraines.
The diagnosis of migraine headache should be seri-
ously considered in any patient who has recurrent
headaches that cause disability.
B. As with other primary headaches, diagnosis is guided by the
IHS’s diagnostic criteria rather than by diagnostic tests.
C. The criteria for migraines are divided into migraines with and
without aura.
1. Migraine without aura
a. A patient must have at least 5 attacks that last 4–72 hours
b. The headache must have 2 of the following qualities:
(1) Unilateral pain
(2) Pulsating pain
(3) Moderate to severe (must limit activity)
(4) Aggravated by routine physical activity
c. And have 1 of the following associated symptoms:
(1) Nausea and/or vomiting
(2) Photophobia or phonophobia
2. Migraine with aura
a. Definition: “Recurring disorder manifesting in attacks
of reversible focal neurological symptoms that usually
develop gradually over 5–20 minutes and lasting less
than 60 minutes.” A migraine type headache usually
follows the aura symptoms. Less commonly, auras can
be followed by a headache that lacks migrainous fea-
tures or auras can occur with no subsequent headache.
b. A patient must have at least 2 attacks.
D. It is important to remember that diagnostic criteria, although
helpful, need to be used carefully when applied to an individ-
ual patient. A patient who clearly has the disease in question
may not perfectly fit the criteria. Consider these data about
some of classic migraine symptoms:
1. 50% of patients with migraines have nonpulsatile headaches.
2. 40% have bilateral headaches.
Diagnostic criteria are more helpful for research
than patient care. They should be used cautiously
with individual patients.
E. Other less common types of migraine occur.
1. These include headaches with aura lasting longer than
60 minutes and migraine aura without a headache.
2. These syndromes are difficult to diagnose and require
exclusion of other diseases (such as cerebrovascular acci-
dent, transient ischemic attack, or retinal detachment)
that could cause similar symptoms.
F. Besides the diagnostic criteria, there are many other aspects of
the history that are suggestive of migraine headaches.
1. A recent, systematic review suggested the mnemonic
POUNDing as a diagnostic test for migraines.
a. Is the headache pulsatile?
b. Does it last between 4 and 72 hours without medica-
tions?
c. Is it unilateral?
d. Is there nausea?
e. Is it disabling?
2. If 4 or 5 questions are answered with “Yes,” the LR+ is 24,
which rules in the diagnosis of migraine headache.
3. Another recent review provided test characteristics for vari-
ous headache qualities in distinguishing migraines from ten-
sion headaches. Table 18–3 shows those characteristics that
have at least a moderate effect on posttest probability.
Table 18–2. Qualities of migraine auras.
Types of aura
Prevalence
Zigzags
56%
Stars or flashes
83%
Scotoma
40%
Hemianopsia
7%
Sensory aura
20%
Aphasia
11%
Motor aura
4%
Duration of aura
Prevalence
< 30 minutes
70%
30-60 minutes
18%
> 60 minutes
7%
Adapted, with permission, from Smetana GW.The diagnostic value of historical
features in primary headache syndromes:a comprehensive review.Arch Intern Med
2000;160:2729–37. Copyrighted © 2000 American Medical Association.All rights
Reserved.
Table 18–3. Characteristics for symptoms of migraine.
Criteria
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+
LR−
Nausea
82
96
23.2
0.19
Photophobia
79
87
6.0
0.24
Phonophobia
5.2
3.7
5.2
0.38
Exacerbated by 
81
78
3.7
0.24
physical activity
Unilateral
66
78
3.1
0.43
Throbbing
76
77
3.3
0.32
Precipitated by 
22
95
4.6
0.82
chocolate
Precipitated by 
38
92
4.9
0.68
cheese
Adapted, with permission, from Smetana GW.The diagnostic value of historical
features in primary headache syndromes: a comprehensive review.Arch Intern
Med 2000; 160:2729-37. Copyrighted © 2000 American Medical Association.All
rights Reserved.
FP
290 /  CHAPTER 18
4. When differentiating migraines from tension headaches,
nausea is an important clue to migraines. 
5. Interestingly, some commonly considered characteristics,
such as headache duration and relationship of headache to
stress, weather, menses, fatigue, and odors, were not help-
ful in differentiating migraines from tension headaches.
6. Presence of a family history was helpful in making the
diagnosis with an LR+ of 5.0.
7. Patients with migraines are also more likely to have had
vomiting attacks as children and to have suffered from
motion sickness.
G. Given the severity of migraine, a common issue is when does
a patient with a probable migraine need neuroimaging? The
following are predictors of abnormal neuroimaging and are
generally agreed upon indications for imaging in people with
headaches.
1. Abnormal neurologic exam or symptoms that are atyp-
ical for aura, especially dizziness, lack of coordination,
numbness or tingling, or worsening of headache with
the Valsalva maneuver
2. Increasing frequency of headaches or a change in
headache quality or pattern
3. Headaches that awaken patients from sleep
4. New headaches in patients over 50
5. First headache, worst headache, or abrupt-onset
headache
6. New headache in patients with cancer, immunosup-
pression, or pregnancy
7. Headache associated with loss of consciousness
8. Headache triggered by exertion
9. Special consideration should be given to a person who
is receiving warfarin therapy.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. M’s physical exam, including a detailed neurologic
exam, is completely normal.
Mr. M’s headaches fulfill the criteria for migraine headaches. They
are pulsatile, unilateral, disabling, and associated with nausea, thus
fulfilling 4 of the POUNDing criteria. The history of motion sick-
ness provides another clue. The increasing frequency and severity
of the headaches is somewhat worrisome, and neurologic imaging
would be reasonable but not entirely necessary given the high pos-
itive likelihood of the POUNDing criteria.
Treatment
A. Treatment of migraines is either abortive or prophylactic.
B. Abortive therapy
1. Abortive therapy should be used at the very first sign of a
migraine. Patients should be advised not to wait until they
“are sure it is a migraine.”
2. Effective drugs are outlined in Table 18–4 with the indi-
vidual considerations mainly from the consensus com-
ments from the US Headache Consortium.
C. Prophylactic therapy
1. Prophylactic therapy is instituted when patient and doctor
agree that the migraines are frequent enough, severe enough,
or persistent enough to warrant regular medications.
2. Prophylactic therapy does not need to be used every day.
It can be used only around the times that migraines pre-
dictably occur (such as perimenstrually).
3. The most effective medications are:
a. β-Blockers
(1) Propranolol
(2) Timolol
b. Divalproex
c. Amitriptyline
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, migraine headaches?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis:Tension Headaches
Textbook Presentation
Tension headaches are the most common type of headache. They
generally occur a few times each month and are described as
Table 18–4. Recommended treatments for migraine.
Drug
Considerations
NSAIDs
First-line therapy; may be used 
with antiemetics
Acetaminophen plus aspirin
Another first-line therapy; may  
plus caffeine 
also be used with antiemetics
Triptans (SQ, PO, IN)
For moderate to severe migraines,
combination with NSAIDS probably
more effective that monotherapy
Dihydroergotamine 
For moderate to severe migraines;
(SQ, IV, IM, IN)
maybe used with antiemetics
Antiemetics (prochlorperazine
Used as adjuncts as above
maleate or metoclopramide)
Opioids
For moderate to severe migraine—
rescue therapy
Limit use due to risk of rebound
and medication overuse
Corticosteroids
Rescue therapy for intractable
migraines
Butalbital plus aspirin 
Occasional use for moderate and
plus caffeine 
severe migraines
Acetaminophen,
Occasional use for mild to moderate
dichloralphenazone, and
migraines
isometheptene 
IM, intramuscular; IN, intranasal; IV, intravenous; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiin-
flammatory drugs; PO, oral; SQ, subcutaneous.
FP
HEADACHE /  291
bilateral and squeezing. They are usually relieved with over-
the-counter analgesics and are seldom severe enough to cause real
disability.
Disease Highlights
A. The IHS definition of episodic tension type headache is,
“Recurrent episodes of H/A lasting minutes to days. The pain
is typically pressing/tightening in quality, of mild or moderate
intensity, bilateral in location and does not worsen with rou-
tine physical activity. Nausea is absent, but photophobia or
phonophobia may be present.”
B. Most common type of headache, it is 1 of the only conditions
discussed in this book that is more likely to be present than
not, the 1-year prevalence of tension headaches is 63% in men
and 86% in women.
C. The IHS criteria differentiate headaches as episodic or chronic
and with or without associated tenderness of pericranial muscles.
D. The pathophysiology of tension headaches is still a topic of
debate.
1. Episodic tension headaches are likely related to tenderness
and spasm in the pericranial muscles while chronic tension
headaches are related to changes in the CNS caused by the
chronic pain of tension headaches.
2. There is evidence to suggest that people who suffer from
more frequent tension headaches have higher levels of per-
ceived stress and lower pain thresholds than those without
headaches.
E. Tension headaches can be troublesome but are seldom disabling.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Because tension headaches are the most common form of
headaches, they are the default diagnosis in almost every
patient with a mild to moderate headache syndrome.
B. A detailed history and physical exam is required to exclude
other headache syndromes that require specific treatment.
C. Special attention should be given to excluding migraines.
D. The IHS diagnostic criteria for episodic tension headaches are:
1. At least 10 previous headaches
2. Duration of 30 minutes to 7 days
3. 2 of the following
a. Pressing or tightening (nonpulsating) quality
b. Mild to moderate in severity (inhibits but does not pre-
vent activity)
c. Bilateral
d. Not aggravated by routine activity
4. No nausea or vomiting
5. Photophobia or phonophobia may be present, but not both
E. Chronic tension type headaches often develop from the more
common episodic headaches. These are similar in quality but
occur at least 15 days of the month.
Treatment
A. Episodic tension headaches
1. Usually treated by patients without the input of a physician.
2. Simple analgesics (acetaminophen or nonsteroidal antiin-
flammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) are the basis of most treatment.
3. For more severe headaches, combinations that include caf-
feine or codeine can be used.
4. In patients with frequent, but still episodic tension
headaches, efforts at stress reduction are helpful.
B. Chronic tension headaches
1. These are often quite difficult to treat especially if they
have been caused by medication overuse.
2. Chronic tension headaches are one of the chronic daily
headaches. This category includes a number of daily headache
syndromes including medication overuse headaches.  
3. One of the first interventions in treating chronic tension
headaches should almost always be “detoxification” from
the patient’s regimen of pain medications.
a. Long-term use of many headache medications has the
potential to cause or exacerbate chronic tension headaches.
b. The most common culprit medications are ergotamine,
NSAIDs, caffeine, and opioids.
c. Detoxification can be difficult and occasionally
requires hospitalization.
4. While all previous medications are being withdrawn, the
addition of tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and stress
management, either alone or in combination, are effective.
a. TCAs work faster than stress management.
b. Even a combination of both TCAs and stress manage-
ment only reduce headache frequency and severity by
about 50%.
Alternative Diagnosis: Headache due to
Unruptured CNS Aneurysm
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation of a headache caused by a CNS aneurysm
is a unilateral and throbbing headache that is new in a middle-
aged patient.
Disease Highlights
A. CNS aneurysm may present in 3 ways
1. Asymptomatic detection: This commonly occurs when a
patient has a ruptured aneurysm and another, nonrup-
tured aneurysm is found during the evaluation.
2. Acute rupture or acute expansion (discussed later in the
chapter)
3. Chronic headache
B. The studies of the chronic headaches caused by unruptured
aneurysms are, by their nature, somewhat flawed since they
must be retrospective.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The headaches of unruptured aneurysms are nonspecific.
1. One study looked retrospectively at the symptoms of
111 patients referred for therapy of unruptured aneurysms;
54 of the patients had symptoms referable to the aneurysm
at the time of diagnosis.
2. Of the 54 patients with symptoms, 35 (65%) had chronic
symptoms.
3. In 18 of these 35 patients, the chronic symptom was
headache without other neurologic sign.
4. Patient’s headaches were divided equally between unilat-
eral and bilateral.
292 /  CHAPTER 18
B. Neuroimaging
1. Contrast-enhanced CT and magnetic resonance angiogra-
phy (MRA) are very sensitive means of detecting CNS
aneurysms.
a. Sensitivity for aneurysms > 1 cm in diameter is proba-
bly 100%.
b. Sensitivity for all aneurysms is lower (62% for CT and
45% for MRI).
(1) Aneurysms < 1 cm can, rarely, cause symptoms.
These symptoms may include chronic headaches.
(2) Repair of aneurysms < 1 cm in a patient who has
not had a previous rupture is generally not recom-
mended since the rupture rates are so low.
2. Traditional angiography
a. Considered the gold standard for diagnosis
b. Usually required prior to repair
c. There are case reports of small aneurysms being missed on
traditional angiography and being seen on CT and MRA.
Treatment
A. The treatment of CNS aneurysms can be accomplished with
neurosurgical or endovascular procedures.
B. Management decisions are difficult in a patient with a small
aneurysm and a suspicious headache because there is no
definitive way to know whether the aneurysm is causing the
headache prior to surgery.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Because the quality of Mr. M’s headaches had not
changed at all, the decision was made not to image his
brain. He was given long-acting propranolol at 80 mg/d
as a prophylactic medication and prescribed oral suma-
triptan to be used as needed as abortive therapy. At a 1-
month follow-up, the patient reported only a single mild
headache for which he used ibuprofen.
The decision to forgo imaging was difficult. Although the likeli-
hood of finding another cause of headaches was small, the patient’s
headaches had changed. His complete response to migraine pro-
phylaxis is diagnostic.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mrs. L is a 65-year-old woman who comes to an outpatient
clinic complaining of headaches. She reports waking up
almost every morning with a moderate to severe, bitempo-
ral headache. She reports never having headaches of any
consequence in the past but has been quite troubled for
the last 2 months.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. L’s headaches are of concern because she is older and the
headaches are new. Her age and the acuity of the headaches are
pivotal features. Both these features raise the likelihood that the
headaches are secondary and, therefore, potentially dangerous.
Morning headaches are classically associated with brain tumors.
Edema forms around the CNS lesion while the patient is supine at
night leading to headaches from increased intracranial pressure in
the morning. Further history is needed, as brain tumors are most
likely in patients with other types of cancer.
Morning headaches are also a fairly common symptom of
many habits, diseases, and exposures. Headaches associated with
substances or their withdrawals are a common cause of morning
headaches. Alcohol, caffeine, and carbon monoxide are probably
the most common. Other common causes of morning headaches
can be grouped as “medical morning headaches.” These are
headaches caused by diseases that are active at night or that disturb
sleep. Nighttime hypoglycemia and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
are common causes of headaches in this category. Tension
headaches should always be in the differential of headaches and
may, on occasion, cause morning headaches.
The presence of a new, bitemporal headache in an older patient
should raise the possibility of temporal arteritis. Although these
headaches are not classically morning headaches, they should still
be considered. Temporal arteritis will be discussed later in the
chapter. Table 18–5 lists the differential diagnosis.
Even more than with most headaches, an extensive
history is necessary in a patient with morning
headaches.
2
Mrs. L reports otherwise feeling well. She says the
headaches occur nearly every morning, irrespective of day
of the week or whether she has slept at home or at her
weekend house. She denies neurologic symptoms such as
focal numbness, weakness, or visual disturbances. She
denies snoring or excessive daytime somnolence. She read
on an Internet site that new-onset, morning headaches
are classic for brain tumors, and she is very nervous.
HEADACHE /  293
Her medical history is notable only for noninsulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus, which has always been under good control.
She reports no recent change in her diet, weight, or medication.
Medications are 325 mg/d of aspirin, 10 mg/d orally of
atorvastatin, and 5 mg of oral glyburide taken twice daily.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Many patients seeking care for a headache believe
they have a brain tumor. It is important to recognize
this—a little definitive reassurance can go a long way.
Leading Hypothesis: Intracranial Neoplasms
Textbook Presentation
Brain tumors classically present with progressive morning
headaches associated with focal neurologic deficits.
Disease Highlights
A. Brain tumors are classified as metastatic, primary extra-axial,
and primary intra-axial.
B. The relative frequency of types of tumors within each type are
listed below:
1. Metastatic
a. Lung, 37%
b. Breast, 19%
c. Melanoma, 16%
2. Primary extra-axial
a. Meningioma, 80%
b. Acoustic neuroma, 10%
c. Pituitary adenoma, 7%
3. Primary intra-axial
a. Glioblastoma, 47%
b. Astrocytoma, 39%
C. Metastatic tumors are about 7 times more common than pri-
mary tumors. Thus, a patient with known malignancy and
new headaches should undergo imaging.
D. Intracranial neoplasms generally present with focal signs,
including seizure, or signs of increased intracranial pressure
such as headache.
E. Although the presenting symptoms vary with type of tumor,
the most common symptoms are:
1. Headache (about 50% of the time)
2. Seizure
3. Hemiparesis
4. Change in mental status
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. The history of a patient’s headache is not particularly help-
ful in making a diagnosis of intracranial neoplasms.
2. One very good report retrospectively studied 111 patients
with brain tumors. The symptoms were nonspecific.
a. Only 48% of patients had headaches.
b. Only 17% had classic brain tumor headache (defined
as severe, worse in the morning and associated with
nausea and vomiting).
c. 77% of patients met the criteria for tension headaches.
d. 9% of patients had migraine-like headaches.
e. The most common qualities were
(1) Intermittent, 62%
(2) Frontal, 68%
(3) Bilateral, 72%
Brain tumor headaches are nonspecific. A patient
with a new headache and a preexisting cancer that
could potentially metastasize to the CNS should
undergo imaging.
B. Neuroimaging
1. Contrast-enhanced CT
a. A reasonable choice for screening patients in whom
there is a low suspicion.
b. The sensitivity of a contrast-enhanced CT for intracra-
nial neoplasm is around 90%.
Table 18–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. L.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Brain tumor
History of malignancy
CNS imaging
Focal neurologic deficit
Active Alternative
Substance exposure
Caffeine: Worst when
Response to 
or withdrawal
sleeping late, often
caffeine
worst on vacations or
weekends
Alcohol: Occurs
Relation only to 
following intoxication
alcohol use
Carbon monoxide 
Carboxyhemo-
poisoning: Headache
globin levels
that occurs in an
exposed cohort and
resolves upon leaving
site of exposure
Medical morning
Nighttime hypoglycemia:
2 AM finger stick
headaches
Most common in
diabetics with recent
medication or diet
changes.
Obstructive sleep apnea:
Polysomnogram
Obesity and daytime
somnolence
Tension headaches
Chronic, pressure-type
Diagnostic criteria
headache of mild to
and exclusion of 
moderate intensity
secondary
headaches
294 /  CHAPTER 18
2. MRI with contrast is the procedure of choice for imaging
brain tumors. The sensitivity of MRI is nearly 100%, and
the detail provided often suggests a likely pathology.
Treatment
A. The treatment of brain tumors depends on the pathology.
B. Importantly, patients with signs of increased intracranial pres-
sure or seizure should be hospitalized immediately enabling
both rapid diagnosis and treatment.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mrs. L’s physical exam, including a detailed neurologic
exam, is normal. Laboratory tests done on the day of the
visit revealed a normal CBC, normal chem-7, and a glyco-
sylated Hgb of 5.9% (down from 7% 3 months earlier).
A noncontrast head CT done on the day of the visit was
normal. The patient was asked to set her alarm and
check a finger-stick glucose at 2 AM. Her reading was
42 mg/dL.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, intracranial neo-
plasms? Have you ruled out the active alter-
natives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Given that intracranial neoplasms are relatively rare in patients
without preexisting cancers and the presence of morning
headaches is a nonspecific finding, it is unlikely that the patient
has a brain tumor. The noncontrast head CT was probably a rea-
sonable test to do. It essentially rules out a tumor and, given the
patient’s concern, it was an effective method of calming her.
After the negative CT and unrevealing laboratory test results,
attention must be turned to possible exposures or the “medical
morning headaches.” The patient’s marked drop in her glycosylated
Hgb and early morning hypoglycemia are suggestive of a diagnosis.
Alternative Diagnosis: Medical Morning
Headaches
Textbook Presentation
Various diseases can cause headaches that occur predominantly in
the morning. The headaches are generally worst upon awakening
and then improve as the day progresses. Classically, the more com-
mon symptoms of the underlying disease (daytime hypoglycemia
with overly controlled diabetes mellitus or daytime somnolence
with OSA) are present.
Disease Highlights
A. The most rigorously defined morning headaches are those
caused by disturbed sleep. The sleep disturbance can be of
almost any etiology.
1. Primary sleep disturbance
a. OSA
b. Periodic leg movement of sleep (PLMS)
2. Abnormal sleep duration
a. Excessive sleep
b. Interrupted sleep
c. Sleep deprivation
3. Secondary to another disease
a. Chronic pain
b. Depression
B. Hypoglycemia that occurs while asleep or awake can cause
headaches.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of medical morning headaches depends on
recognition of the underlying disease, its treatment, and the
response of the presenting headache.
B. Recognition of the OSA and nighttime hypoglycemia can be
difficult since clinical clues are nonspecific.
1. Nighttime hypoglycemia should be considered in any
patient treated for diabetes and morning headaches.
Abnormal nocturnal glucose readings and resolution of
headaches with achievement of euglycemia are diagnostic.
2. Clinical predictors of OSA are poor (See Chapter 16,
Fatigue). Polysomnography is diagnostic and will also pro-
vide information about PLMS and, sometimes, insomnia
related to chronic pain.
A sleep study is a reasonable diagnostic test in a
patient with morning headaches and no readily
apparent cause.
Treatment 
The treatment of medical morning headaches depends on the cause.
A. Nighttime hypoglycemia: improved management of diabetes
B. OSA: Continuous positive airway pressure
C. PLMS: Carbidopa and levodopa
D. Pain syndromes: Improved pain control
Alternative Diagnosis: Headaches Associated
with Substances or Their Withdrawal
Textbook Presentation
These are headaches that occur in close temporal relation to sub-
stance exposure or substance withdrawal. They resolve when cul-
prit substance is no longer used.
Disease Highlights
A. Many substances can cause headaches acutely, with long-term
use, or after their withdrawal.
1. Acute exposure
a. Nitrites (“hot dog headache”)
b. MSG (“Chinese restaurant syndrome”)
c. Carbon monoxide
2. Long-term exposure (analgesics)
3. Withdrawal from acute exposure (alcohol)
HEADACHE /  295
4. Withdrawal from chronic exposure
a. Caffeine
b. Opioids
B. Of these headaches, caffeine withdrawal, hangovers, and car-
bon monoxide poisoning are probably the most common
causes of morning headaches.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Caffeine withdrawal headaches
1. The IHS criteria require that:
a. Patients have a headache that is bilateral or pulsating or
both.
b. Patients drink ≥200 mg of caffeine daily for > 2 weeks.
c. The headaches occur within 24 hours of the last caf-
feine intake and are relieved within 1 hour by 100 mg
of caffeine.
d. That the headache resolves within 7 days of total caf-
feine withdrawal.
2. An average cup of coffee contains about 100 mg of caffeine.
3. Premium coffees may contain significantly more. A 12-oz
coffee at Starbucks contains 375 mg of caffeine.
4. The average adult American ingests approximately 280
mg of caffeine each day.
5. Caffeine withdrawal should be suspected if headaches
seem to occur when coffee intake changes, such as on
weekends and during vacations.
Caffeine withdrawal should be considered when
headaches occur when patients sleep later than
usual or occur mainly on weekends or vacations.
B. Carbon monoxide poisoning
1. Presentation runs the spectrum from mild headache to
headache with nausea, vomiting, and anxiety to coma and
cardiovascular collapse.
2. Various aspects of a patient’s history increase suspicion of
this diagnosis.
a. A patient’s headache only occurs in a single location and
resolves when the patient is removed from this setting.
b. Multiple family members or roommates have similar
symptoms.
c. Carbon monoxide poisoning is most common in the
winter.
3. An elevated carboxyhemoglobin level makes the diagnosis.
ABG measurement and pulse oximetry do not detect car-
bon monoxide poisoning.
Because carbon monoxide poisoning is potentially life-
threatening, the diagnosis should be considered when-
ever a patient has a potentially consistent history.
Treatment
A. Treatment of headaches associated with substances or their
withdrawal depends on the substance.
B. Patients with headaches from carbon monoxide poisoning
should be removed from their house while the source is
repaired.
C. Patients with caffeine withdrawal headaches should either be
weaned off caffeine or counseled on the need to continue reg-
ular use (an option generally preferred by medical students).
CASE RESOLUTION
2
A tentative diagnosis of morning headaches due to noc-
turnal hypoglycemia was made. The patient was advised
not to take the evening dose of glyburide; her headaches
resolved the next day. At her next visit, the patient’s
medications were inspected. The label on the bottle was
correct, but inspection of the pills revealed that 10-mg
pills had been mistakenly dispensed, doubling her dose.
Adverse effects of medications are common. Although most com-
monly intrinsic to the medication, they can also be related to inap-
propriate prescribing or incorrect dispensing.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Mr. J is a 27-year-old man who arrives at his primary care
physician’s office complaining of a headache. He has a
long history of mild tension-type headaches managed
with acetaminophen. Three days ago, a severe headache
suddenly developed while he was weight lifting. He
describes this headache as the “worst headache of his
life.” The headache slowly resolved over about 2 hours. He
is now feeling completely well. He has been afraid to exer-
cise since this headache.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Both the acuity and severity of this headache are worrisome and
pivotal. The onset during exercise is also concerning. This type of
headache, one that begins at its peak intensity, is referred to as a
thunderclap headache.
296 /  CHAPTER 18
SAH is the leading hypothesis and must not miss diagnosis for
this type of headache. His designation of the headache as the
“worst headache of his life” is classic for SAH, although the reso-
lution of the pain is not typical. Other headaches can present in
similar fashion. Benign thunderclap headaches are clinically indis-
tinguishable from SAH. Headaches due to cough, exertion, and
sexual activity are primary headache syndromes that may mimic
SAH. A parenchymal hemorrhage is possible but unlikely given
the patient’s age and absence of a history of hypertension.
There are some rare diseases that can occasionally present with
a thunderclap headache; these include cerebral venous sinus
thrombosis, pituitary apoplexy, carotid dissection, and sponta-
neous intracranial hypotension from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
leaks. Table 18–6 lists the differential diagnosis.
Assume that a thunderclap headache is caused by a SAH until
proven otherwise.
A headache that starts abruptly and is reaches its
maximal severity within seconds (a thunderclap
headache) should be assumed to be caused by a sub-
arachnoid hemorrhage until proven otherwise.
3
Mr. J’s past medical history is notable only for mild
asthma for which he uses albuterol as needed.
On physical exam, he appears well and not in any dis-
tress. His vital signs are temperature, 36.9°C; pulse, 82
bpm; BP, 112/82 mm Hg; RR, 14 breaths per minute. His
neck is supple and detailed neurologic exam is also normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: SAH
Textbook Presentation
A middle-aged patient experiences “the worst headache of his life.”
Soon after the headache begins, the patient experiences vomiting
and then focal neurologic symptoms. Soon after presentation the
patient loses consciousness. If the patient is alert at the time of
medical assessment, focal neurologic signs and meningismus are
present on the physical exam.
Disease Highlights
A. SAH is primarily caused by rupture of a saccular aneurysm in
or near the circle of Willis (≈85%).
B. Aneurysms are present in about 4% of the population.
C. Largest aneurysms (> 1 cm) rupture at a rate of about 0.5%/year.
D. The vast majority of ruptures occur in persons 40–65 years old.
E. SAH carries a mortality of about 50%.
F. It is generally accepted that anywhere from 10% to 50% of
patients will have a warning or sentinel headache in the weeks
preceding the SAH.
1. Likely caused by expansion or a small leak from an aneurysm.
2. This headache is usually the same sort of abrupt onset (thun-
derclap) headache as SAH but resolves within 24 hours.
3. About 50% of patients with warning headaches actually
seek medical care at the time of their headache.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Pretest probability
1. SAH accounts for 1–4% of headaches presenting to the
emergency department.
2. Among headaches presenting to the emergency depart-
ment, SAH accounts for
a. 12% of patients with the “worst headache of my life”
b. 25% of patients with the “worst headache of my life”
and neurologic findings
3. The prevalence of the various possible symptoms of SAH
vary from study to study. Some of the more common
symptoms are listed below (with prevalence figures from 1
large review).
a. Headache, 90%
b. Stiff neck, 74%
c. Change in mental status, 60%
d. Stupor or coma, 27%
B. Diagnostic tests
1. The initial diagnostic test is a noncontrast head CT. The
sensitivity of this test varies with the time since the onset
of symptoms.
a. First 12 hours, 97%
b. 12–24 hours, 93%
c. Falls to as low as 80% after 2 weeks.
2. Next to angiography, CSF exam for RBC and xanthochro-
mia (the result of first oxyhemoglobin and later bilirubin)
from deteriorating RBCs is the most accurate diagnostic
method.
a. RBCs are seen immediately in the CSF in 100% of
patients. The specificity, however, can be limited by trau-
matic lumbar punctures.
Table 18–6. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. J.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Subarachnoid
“Worst headache of life”
Noncontrast head
hemorrhage (SAH)
Acute onset
CT scan
Lumbar puncture
Active Alternative
Cough, exertional, and Acute headaches
History
sexual headaches
associated with cough,
CNS imaging
exertion,or sexual activity
Benign thunderclap
Indistinguishable 
Noncontrast head 
headaches
from SAH
CT scan
Lumbar puncture
Intracerebral
Headache with focal 
Noncontrast head
hemorrhage
neurologic signs
CT scan
HEADACHE /  297
b. Sensitivity of RBCs begins to fall after about 24 hours.
c. Spectrophotometric detection of xanthochromia is
100% specific for SAH.
d. Most experts suggest delaying the lumbar puncture for
6–12 hours after the onset of a headache in a patient with
a suspicious headache and negative CT scan as it takes
12–24 hours for the sensitivity to reach nearly 100%.
e. The sensitivity of xanthochromia remains at 100% for
over 1 week.
3. In all patients with documented SAH, angiography is per-
formed to assist in surgical planning. Angiography might
also be done for patients in whom the diagnosis is unclear
even after lumbar puncture.
C. Importance of correct diagnosis
1. About 25% of patients with SAH are initially misdiagnosed.
2. Patients with less severe clinical presentations are most
commonly misdiagnosed.
3. Patients who are initially misdiagnosed are only about half
as likely to have a good or excellent outcome.
All patients in whom SAH is suspected should
undergo a noncontrast head CT. Lumbar puncture
should be done in a patient with a normal head CT
and even only minimal suspicion of a SAH.
Treatment
A. Prevention of rebleeding
1. The primary treatment of a SAH is to occlude the culprit
aneurysm to prevent rebleeding.
2. This is usually accomplished by deploying platinum coils via
arterial catheters within the aneurysm to cause occlusion.
3. Neurosurgical clipping of aneurysms is now second-line
therapy.
B. Prevention of cerebral vasospasm and resulting ischemia
1. The cause of cerebral vasospasm is poorly understood but
is predicted by the volume of blood lost in hemorrhage
and loss of consciousness at the time of hemorrhage.
2. Calcium antagonists, primarily nimodipine, decrease the
risk of vasospasm.
C. Management of hydrocephalus
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
The patient had a thunderclap headache that he describes as the
worst headache of his life, which mandates urgent evaluation.
3
Mr. J is referred from clinic for a noncontrast head CT.
The results are normal.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, SAH? Have you ruled
out the active alternatives? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnoses: Primary Cough
Headache, Primary Exertional Headache, and
Headache Associated with Sexual Activity
Textbook Presentation
These headaches are primary headaches precipitated by cough,
exertion (usually involving the Valsalva maneuver), and sexual
activity (peaking at orgasm). They may mimic SAH.
Disease Highlights
A. Cough headaches
1. Most common in men (≈3:1)
2. More common in older patients (mean age, 67)
3. Last < 1 minute
B. Exertional headaches
1. Most common in men (≈ 90%)
2. Occurs in young people (mean age, 24)
3. Often bilateral and throbbing
4. Sometimes related to migraines (some patients may
induce migraines with physical activity)
5. Lasts from 5 minutes to 24 hours
C. Sexual headaches
1. Also most common in men (≈85%)
2. Mean age, 41
3. Lasts < 3 hours
4. Can occur as 3 types
a. Dull type: dull headache worsening with sexual
excitement
b. Explosive type: SAH-like headache occurring at orgasm
c. Postural type: postural headache developing after
coitus
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Although these headaches may be indistinguishable from
more concerning headaches, the clinical presentation can
sometimes help identify the diagnosis.
B. They should be considered when the headache starts with
cough, sexual activity, or exercise.
C. One review suggested other distinguishing features.
1. Cough headaches
a. Either represented the primary headache syndrome or
symptoms of an Arnold-Chiari type I malformation in
which the cerebellar tonsils protrude out of the base of
the skull
b. Those headaches lasting > 30 minutes were usually sec-
ondary to a Chiari type I malformation.
c. Patients with Chiari type I malformations were
younger than those with primary cough headaches
(mean age, 39 vs 67)
2. Sexual headaches
a. Almost always (93%) benign
b. The only sexual headache not part of the primary syn-
drome was a SAH.
c. Patients with benign sexual headaches tended to have
multiple episodes of the headache.
298 /  CHAPTER 18
3. Exertional headaches
a. Either represented the primary headache syndrome or
secondary headache including SAH and brain tumor.
b. The primary and secondary headaches were generally
indistinguishable.
Exertional headaches are clinically indistinguishable
from SAH.
Treatment 
A. Cough headaches are effectively treated with cough suppres-
sion and NSAIDs.
B. Exertional headaches are treated by avoiding strenuous activ-
ity, especially in hot weather or at high altitudes or by using
preexertion ergotamine, β-blockers, or NSAIDs.
C. Sexual headaches are effectively treated with prophylactic β-
blockers.
Alternative Diagnosis: Benign Thunderclap
Headache
Textbook Presentation
Benign thunderclap headaches present in a way indistinguishable
from SAH. The diagnosis is made after normal results are obtained
on CT scan and lumbar puncture. These headaches occasionally
recur in an unpredictable way.
Disease Highlights
A. Primary headache syndrome
B. Clinically indistinguishable from SAH but lacks any associ-
ated neurologic symptoms or signs.
C. Headaches frequently recur over 1–2 weeks and then inter-
mittently over years.
D. In the best study of these headaches:
1. SAH developed in none of the 71 patients studied.
2. Headaches generally lasted from 8 to 72 hours.
3. 51 (72%) of the patients had their headaches unrelated to
cough, sexual activity, or exertion.
4. 17% of the patients had recurrent, similar headaches.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Benign thunderclap headaches are diagnosed when there is a
suspicious clinical presentation and SAH is ruled out.
B. Given the poor prognosis of SAH, CT scan and lumbar punc-
ture should be performed in all patients prior to the diagnosis.
Because benign thunderclap headaches are clinically
indistinguishable from SAH, they can only be diag-
nosed after SAH has been ruled out.
Treatment
A. Treatment is challenging because these headaches are short-
lived and very intermittent.
B. As-needed analgesics are probably the only reasonable therapy.
Alternative Diagnosis: Intracerebral
Hemorrhage
Textbook Presentation
Intracerebral hemorrhage generally presents in older, hypertensive
patients with acute-onset headache and focal neurologic symp-
toms and signs.
Disease Highlights
A. Intracerebral hemorrhage accounts for about 10% of strokes,
being less common than embolic and thrombotic strokes.
B. Hypertension is the most common cause, followed by amy-
loid angiopathy, saccular aneurysm rupture, and arteriove-
nous malformation rupture.
C. Among patients with hypertension, Asians and blacks have
the highest risk of hemorrhagic cerebrovascular accidents.
D. The incidence of hypertension-related intracerebral hemor-
rhage has declined over the last 3 decades with better control
of hypertension.
E. In young patients without hypertension, diseases such as arte-
riovenous malformation, aneurysm rupture, and drug use
should be considered.
F. Arteriovenous malformations are present in 0.01% to 0.05%
of the population and usually present in persons between the
ages of 20 and 40 years.
1. Presentation may be with hemorrhage, seizure, or headache.
2. About 50% of patients with arteriovenous malformation
will experience bleeding. Patients with hypertension or a
previous hemorrhage have the highest rate of bleeding.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Patients with intracerebral hemorrhage usually have headache
and focal neurologic signs.
B. A thunderclap-type headache is the presenting sign in nearly
60% of patients.
C. Vomiting is present in about 50% of patients, and seizures are
present in about 10%.
D. Noncontrast CT and MRI are equally accurate in making this
diagnosis with sensitivities of nearly 100%. MRI may be better
at detecting hemorrhagic transformation of ischemic strokes.
Treatment
See the Treatment section under Cerebellar Hemorrhage in Chap-
ter 13, Dizziness.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Given the acute-onset during exercise, the normal neuro-
logic exam, and the lack of symptoms during the inter-
vening 3 days, the patient was thought to have primary
exertional headache. A sentinel headache, preceding an
SAH, however, was thought a must not miss alternative.
Given this, the patient underwent lumbar puncture that
revealed no RBCs and no xanthochromia. He subse-
quently experienced a similar headache 2 weeks later
with exercise. He was then treated with preexercise pro-
pranolol with good response.
HEADACHE /  299
The evaluation of this patient was reasonable. Although he was
feeling well at the time of the visit, the test threshold for SAH needs
to be very low given the severity of disease. SAH tends to be mis-
diagnosed in patients with the mildest symptoms. This is because
the physician’s suspicion is lowest in these patients and probably
because the CT scan may be less sensitive in people with presum-
ably small hemorrhages. Accurate diagnosis of these patients is
highly desirable as they potentially have the best outcomes.
With a normal CT scan and a negative lumbar puncture, the
diagnosis becomes either benign thunderclap headache or benign
exertional headache. The difference is likely semantic, but the
headache’s onset and recurrence during exercise makes benign exer-
tional headache the diagnosis. Intracerebral bleed from an arteri-
ovenous malformation was a possibility but was ruled out with the
normal CT scan.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
4
Mrs. T is an 80-year-old woman who comes to your office
complaining of headaches for the past 3 months. She
reports always having had mild headaches that never
troubled her enough to see a doctor. This headache has
been persistent, bilateral, band-like, and throbbing.
At her present visit, she reports no visual changes, no
recent head trauma, and no neurologic deficits. She does
report fatigue and says that she has lost about 15 lbs
over the last month. She denies jaw symptoms.
Her past medical history is notable for hypertension
for which she takes hydrochlorothiazide and a breast
mass noted 2 years before. The mass was thought to be
low suspicion for malignancy and the patient declined
work-up.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
This presentation is of concern because the patient is elderly, she
has a new headache, and she has experienced weight loss. The dif-
ferential diagnosis must take into account these pivotal points of
age, subacute onset, and constitutional symptoms. The persistence
of the headache probably excludes diagnoses such as intracerebral
hemorrhage or infections.
Temporal arteritis and malignancy are both possible given the
patient’s age and subacute presentation. The throbbing nature of
the pain and weight loss could certainly be consistent with either
of these types of headache. The history of a breast mass has to
make metastatic disease a real consideration. Subdural hematoma
is possible, but the lack of a history of head trauma makes this less
likely. Although a diagnosis of tension headaches should be given
with extreme caution in an elderly person with new headaches, the
persistent band-like description raises this possibility. Table 18–7
lists the differential diagnosis.
4
Soon after the headache began (3 months prior to her
current presentation), she went to an emergency department 
and cervical osteoarthritis was diagnosed. She was given
ibuprofen, muscle relaxants, and a referral to a rheuma-
tologist. She saw the rheumatologist about 2 weeks
later. An ESR done at that visit was 56 mm/h.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis:Temporal Arteritis
Textbook Presentation
Temporal arteritis classically presents in white women over age 50
as a bilateral, throbbing headache. Jaw pain and fatigue with
chewing (jaw claudication) may be present. There may be a his-
tory of polymyalgia rheumatica or consistent symptoms (shoulder
and hip girdle pain) and the physical exam can reveal beading and
tenderness of the temporal arteries. The erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) is usually elevated.
Table 18–7. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs.T.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Temporal arteritis
Throbbing headache
Erythrocyte
Symptoms of polymyalgia
sedimentation
rheumatica
rate (ESR)
Temporal artery
Temporal artery 
abnormalities
biopsy
Active Alternative—Most Common
Tension headache
Chronic, pressure-type
Diagnostic criteria
headache of mild to
and exclusion of
moderate intensity
secondary
headaches
Active Alternative
Brain tumor
History of malignancy
CNS imaging
Focal neurologic deficit
Other Alternative
Subdural hematoma
Elderly patients with a
Noncontrast 
history of falls 
head CT scan
300 /  CHAPTER 18
Disease Highlights
A. Temporal (or giant cell) arteritis is a corticosteroid-responsive
vasculitis of large arteries.
B. Primarily involves the vessels of the aortic arch, particularly
the external carotid.
C. Affects persons over age 50, women more commonly than men.
D. Although the most common presentation is a new headache,
temporal arteritis can present with nonspecific manifestations
of a chronic inflammatory disorder.
1. Fever
2. Anemia
3. Fatigue
4. Weight loss
5. Elevated ESR or C-reactive protein
E. It can also present with specific complications of the disease.
1. Jaw claudication
2. Blindness (secondary to ophthalmic artery vasculitis)
F. Related to polymyalgia rheumatica
1. 15% of patients with polymyalgia rheumatica have tem-
poral arteritis.
2. As many as 40% of patients with temporal arteritis have
polymyalgia rheumatica.
F. Rapid diagnosis and treatment are critical to prevent
vasculitis-associated thrombosis in the effected vessels. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Clinical findings
1. The clinical signs and symptoms of temporal arteritis are
not highly predictive.
2. Two recent systematic reviews presented test characteris-
tics for many of the commonly cited findings. These are
outlined in Table 18–8.
3. A few combinations of signs and symptoms have been
found to have very high positive LRs.
a. Headache and jaw claudication: LR+ 8.0
b. Scalp tenderness and jaw claudication: LR+ 17.0 
4. Reflecting the poor performance of these clinical predic-
tors, only 30–40% of patients referred for temporal artery
biopsy have the disease.
Because the clinical signs and symptoms of tempo-
ral arteritis are not highly predictive, temporal artery
biopsy should be used in any patient in whom the
clinical suspicion is even moderate.
B. ESR has been used to “rule out” temporal arteritis.
1. The sensitivity of an abnormal ESR is 96–99%.
2. The test characteristics of the ESR at various cut points are
shown below. (A normal ESR is usually considered to be <
age/2 in men and (age + 10)/2 in women.)
a. Abnormal: LR+, 1.1–1.2; LR−, 0.025-0.2
b. ESR > 50 mm/h: LR+, 1.2; LR−, 0.35
c. ESR > 100 mm/h: LR+, 1.9; LR−, 0.8
C. Temporal artery ultrasound
1. Ultrasound has been used as a diagnostic tool
2. Inflamed arteries have a hypoechoic halo around the lumen.
3. Most studies have found this finding to be insensitive and
not specific enough to avoid biopsy.
D. Temporal artery biopsy
1. Considered the gold standard for diagnosing temporal arteritis.
2. Given the difficulty of clinically diagnosing temporal
arteritis and the common side effects of the treatment,
temporal artery biopsy is always recommended to establish
the diagnosis of temporal arteritis.
3. Although biopsy should be done as quickly as possible
once the disease is suspected, a short delay after beginning
treatment (≈7 days) probably does not effect the results.
Treatment of temporal arteritis should not be
delayed to perform a biopsy in a patient in whom
temporal arteritis is suspected.
4. Biopsy of a palpably abnormal artery is the most accurate.
If the artery is palpably normal, longer and bilateral biop-
sies are useful.
5. There are cases of biopsy-negative temporal arteritis. One
much quoted study gave the following test characteristics
for temporal artery biopsy.
a. Sensitivity, 85%; specificity, 100%
b. LR+, ∞LR−, 0.15
Even in the setting of a negative temporal artery
biopsy, a patient with very high suspicion for tempo-
ral arteritis should be monitored closely or treated.
Treatment
A. The treatment of temporal arteritis is corticosteroids.
B. Corticosteroids should be started immediately in a patient in
whom temporal arteritis is suspected.
C. Corticosteroids can be tapered slowly once there has been
clinical remission as long as the inflammatory markers (ESR,
C-reactive protein) remain depressed.
Table 18–8. Positive LRs for signs and symptoms of
temporal arteritis.
Symptom or Sign
LR+
Jaw claudication
4.2–6.7
Diplopia
3.4–3.5
Beaded temporal artery
4.6
Enlarged temporal artery
4.3
Scalp tenderness
3.0
Temporal artery tenderness
2.6
Any temporal artery abnormality
2.0
Adapted, with permission, from Smetana GW, Shmerling RH. Does this patient
have temporal arteritis? JAMA. 2002;287:92–101. Copyrighted © 2000 American
Medical Association.All rights Reserved.
FP
HEADACHE /  301
D. Methotrexate might be an option in patients who do not tol-
erate corticosteroid withdrawal as a steroid-sparing agent.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
4
Physical exam is notable for vital signs of temperature,
37.1°C; BP, 130/82 mm Hg; pulse, 72 bpm; RR, 10 breaths
per minute. Head and neck exam revealed bilateral
cataracts with some prominence of the temporal arter-
ies. Heart, lung, and abdominal exams were normal.
Breast exam revealed a 2 × 3 cm mass in the left breast
that was soft and freely mobile, which seemed unchanged
from a description in the patient’s chart from 2 years
earlier. Extremity exam was notable for bruises over her
left elbow and shoulder from a fall. Neurologic exam is
fully intact.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, temporal arteritis?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Temporal arteritis certainly remains high on the differential diag-
nosis. Her headache and physical exam are both suspicious.
Assuming a pretest probability of 40% (the usual percentage of
positive biopsies among people in whom temporal arteritis is sus-
pected), the prominence of her temporal arteries (LR+ = 2)
increases the likelihood of the diagnosis to 57%.
Both her history of falls and the breast mass (although likely
benign) keep subdural hematoma and brain metastasis in the dif-
ferential diagnosis.
Alternative Diagnosis: Subdural Hematoma
Textbook Presentation
Subdural hematoma is usually seen in older patients with a history
of falls and neurologic deterioration. The classic triad of symp-
toms of chronic subdural hematoma is headache, somnolence, and
change in mental status.
Disease Highlights
A. Subdural hematomas may be acute (within 24 hours of
injury), subacute (1–14 days after injury), or chronic.
B. Acute and subacute subdural hematomas generally pose little
diagnostic problem. They usually produce evolving, focal
neurologic deficits.
C. Chronic subdural hematomas can present with subtle symp-
toms, weeks to months after trauma and can pose a real diag-
nostic challenge.
D. Chronic subdural hematoma is a disease seen in the elderly
and others with cerebral atrophy who can accommodate a
slowly expanding mass of blood in the subdural space.  
E. Risk factors for subdural hematomas are frequent falls, alco-
holic dependence, and use of anticoagulant medications such
as warfarin or aspirin.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion because the
presenting symptoms are often subtle.
2. The mean age at diagnosis is around 70 years in most studies.
3. The most common presenting symptoms are falls and pro-
gressive neurologic deficit.
4. Head trauma, transient neurologic deficit, seizure, and
headache are also not uncommon modes of presentation.
5. The absence of a trauma history should not be particularly
reassuring as this history is often hard to establish.
The most common presenting symptom of chronic
subdural hematoma is a history of falls. A high
index of suspicion should be present for subdural
hematoma in any elderly patient with a history of
falls and subacute neurologic deficits.
B. Neuroimaging
1. CT scan and MRI are both effective means of diagnosing
chronic subdural hematoma.
2. Caution should be used with noncontrast head CT scan
because the blood in a chronic subdural hematoma can
sometimes be isodense with cortical tissue.
Treatment
Chronic subdural hematomas are treated with surgical drainage
unless they are small and asymptomatic.
CASE RESOLUTION
4
Laboratory tests are done, and the patient is sent for a
precontrast head CT to look for hemorrhage and a post-
contrast study to increase the sensitivity for parenchy-
mal lesions. The patient’s test results follow: Hgb, 9.0 g/dL
(11.7 g/dL 1 month earlier); Hct, 28.1% (36.6% 1 month ear-
lier); ESR, 125 mm/h. The head CT was normal other than
cerebral atrophy expected for the patient’s age.
Mrs. T was given 60 mg of prednisone daily and
referred for a temporal artery biopsy. This was done 3 days
later and was diagnostic for temporal arteritis. Her
headache improved after 1 week of therapy. Over the next
2 years, multiple attempts at weaning corticosteroids
failed, and the patient continues to take 15 mg of pred-
nisone. While taking prednisone, a spinal compression
fracture, acne, diabetes mellitus, and difficult-to-control
hypertension develop.
The elevated ESR made the diagnosis of temporal arteritis likely
but by no means certain. Taking the pretest probability of 57%, as
it stood after the physical exam, an ESR > 100 mm/h raises the
probability to 72%. This is probably not high enough to accept
the side effects of long-term prednisone therapy without a more
definitive diagnosis.
302 /  CHAPTER 18
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Meningitis
Textbook Presentation
Classically, meningitis presents with the acute onset of the triad of
headache, fever, and a stiff neck. Meningitis may occur in the set-
ting of a cluster of cases.
Disease Highlights
A. The presentation of fever and headache is common and can
be worrisome, potentially caused by anything from influenza
to meningitis. The differential includes:
1. Viral infections and almost any other febrile illness
2. Meningitis (bacterial, fungal, viral, or parasitic)
3. Encephalitis
4. Sinusitis
5. CNS abscess
6. Septic cavernous sinus thrombosis
B. Although certainly not the most common cause of fever and
headache, meningitis is a relatively common, potentially life-
threatening illness.
C. Viral causes are 3–4 times more common than bacterial
causes and have a generally favorable prognosis.
D. Bacterial meningitis must be treated as a medical emergency.
E. Mortality rates vary by organism but community-acquired
bacterial meningitis has a mortality rate of about 25%.
F. Mortality rates are higher for hospital-acquired infections.
G. The most common organisms are listed in Table 18–9.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. A recent review studied patients in Holland in whom
community-acquired bacterial meningitis was diagnosed over
a 3 1/2 year time period; the prevalence of various exam fea-
tures follow: 
1. 95% of patients had at least 2 of the findings of headache,
fever, stiff neck, or mental status changes
a. 87% had a headache 
b. 83% had stiff neck
c. 77% had temperature > 38.0°C
d. 69% had a change in mental status
2. 33% had focal neurologic findings
3. 34% of those who had imaging done had an abnormal CT scan
B. Patients with suppressed immune systems and the elderly are
less likely to have a stiff neck.
1. Two of the most commonly used meningeal signs are
Kernig (the inability to extend the knee with a flexed hip)
and Brudzinski (the demonstration of flexion of both the
knees and hips upon forced flexion of the neck).
2. These signs are present in only about 60% of patients with
meningitis.
C. Lumbar puncture
1. Lumbar puncture is the only means of making a definitive
diagnosis.
2. The CSF in acute bacterial meningitis will demonstrate
WBCs with neutrophil predominance, low glucose, and
high protein.
D. Patients with contraindications to lumbar puncture
1. Frequently, the question of contraindication to lumbar
puncture is raised.
2. Performing a lumbar puncture in a patient with a CNS
mass, elevated intracranial pressure, or a bleeding diathesis
places the patient at risk for complications such as hernia-
tion, paraspinal hemorrhage, and death.
3. CNS imaging should be performed before lumbar punc-
ture in any patient in whom there is a suspicion of
increased intracranial pressure.
4. Findings associated with mass effect on CT scan are
a. Age > 60 years
b. Immunocompromise
c. Preexisting CNS disease
d. Seizure within the previous week
e. Abnormal level of consciousness
f. Inability to answer 2 consecutive questions or follow 2
consecutive commands correctly
g. Gaze palsy, abnormal visual fields, facial palsy, arm or
leg drift, aphasia
Patients with an abnormal neurologic exam should
undergo CNS imaging prior to lumbar puncture.
5. If CNS imaging is required, a patient with suspected
meningitis should have blood cultures drawn and then
receive empiric antibiotics immediately, undergo a CT
scan, and then have the lumbar puncture.
Treatment
A. As with all infectious diseases, the specific treatment depends
on the pathogen.
Table 18–9. Common causes of meningitis in adults.
Organism
Characteristics
Viruses
Enteroviruses (echovirus and coxsackievirus)
most common
More common in children than adults
Summer and Fall predominance
Streptococcus
Most common bacterial meningitis in adults 
pneumoniae
of all ages
May occur de novo or by contiguous spread
(sinuses, ears)
Mortality rates ≈30%
Neisseria 
Second most common cause overall
meningitidis
May occur in epidemics
Most commonly seen in young adults
Mortality rates ≈10%
Listeria 
Disease of older adults (older than 60 years)
monocytogenes
and immunosuppressed (including patients
with diabetes and alcohol abuse)
Haemophilus
Previously very common cause of meningitis
influenzae
in children;now rare because of vaccination
HEADACHE /  303
B. Because of the severity of meningeal infections, empiric therapy
is recommended while waiting for Gram stain and culture results.
C. Antibiotic treatment should be ordered when the diagnosis of
meningitis is suspected and given immediately after CSF begins
to be collected.
D. In adult patients with suspected community-acquired menin-
gitis, the current recommendations are to treat empirically
with a third-generation cephalosporin and vancomycin.
E. If Listeria monocytogenes is suspected, ampicillin is also added.
F. Corticosteroids should be added to the regimen in patients
with a mid-range Glasgow coma scale (8-11).
Headaches Associated with Head Trauma
Textbook Presentation
A common presentation of a posttraumatic headache would be a
middle-aged person who recently suffered head trauma, usually
without detectable cranial or neurologic injury, with a headache
similar in quality to tension headaches. The headaches are often
associated with symptoms such as irritability or anxiety.
Disease Highlights
A. Head trauma can cause serious cranial or neurologic injury
including subdural, epidural or parenchymal hematoma,
SAH, cerebral contusion, or depressed skull fracture.
B. More commonly, head trauma can cause new headaches or
worsen preexisting headache syndromes.
C. Trauma-related headaches might occur after minor or major
trauma. The IHS requires 2 of the following to qualify as
major trauma:
1. Loss of consciousness > 30 minutes
2. 45 minutes of posttraumatic amnesia
3. Objective measures of cranial or neurologic trauma
D. There appears to be a significant amount of psychiatric dis-
tress and disability associated with posttraumatic headaches.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Acute evaluation of head trauma
1. In a patient with head trauma or a headache seemingly
associated with head trauma, the first goal is to identify
important and potentially treatable injury.
2. The initial test is usually a head CT scan. A difficult ques-
tion is who can be clinically cleared without a CT scan.
a. Two clinical decision rules (The Canadian Head CT
Rule and The New Orleans Criteria) are guides to who
does and does not need neuroimaging.  
b. The New Orleans Criteria state that in patients with
minor head trauma and a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15
(normal) patients with any of the following should
have a head CT: headache, vomiting, age > 60, drug or
alcohol intoxication, persistent anterograde amnesia,
visible trauma above the clavicle, seizure.
c. The Canadian Head CT Rule is referenced at the end
of the chapter.  
d. Both rules have nearly 100% sensitivity for clinically
important brain injuries and injuries requiring neuro-
surgical intervention.
B. Diagnosis of posttraumatic headaches
1. The next step is to diagnose ongoing headaches as post-
traumatic.
2. The IHS classifies these headaches into headaches follow-
ing minor or major trauma (see above) and into acute
(occurs within 7 days of the injury and resolves within
3 months) or chronic (occurs within 7 days of the injury
and does not resolve within 3 months).
3. Headache develops in about 25% of patients following
minor trauma.
a. These headaches are most likely to be chronic.
b. They are also most likely to meet criteria for tension-
type headaches.
Treatment
A. The treatment of posttraumatic headaches is generally similar
to the treatment of clinically similar headaches.
B. It does appear that associated psychological treatment, such as
biofeedback and treatment of associated posttraumatic stress
syndrome, might be beneficial.
REFERENCES
Detsky ME, McDonald DR, Baerlocher MO, Tomlinson GA, McCrory DC,
Booth CM. Does this patient with headache have a migraine or need neu-
roimaging? JAMA. 2006;296(10):1274–83.
Edlow JA, Caplan LR. Avoiding pitfalls in the diagnosis of subarachnoid hemor-
rhage. N Engl J Med. 2000;342(1):29–36.
Forsyth PA, Posner JB. Headaches in patients with brain tumors: a study of 111
patients. Neurology. 1993;43(9):1678–83.
Holroyd KA, O’Donnell FJ, Stensland M, Lipchik GL, Cordingley GE, Carlson
BW. Management of chronic tension-type headache with tricyclic antide-
pressant medication, stress management therapy, and their combination: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;285(17):2208–15.
Pascual J, Iglesias F, Oterino A, Vazquez-Barquero A, Berciano J. Cough, exer-
tional, and sexual headaches: an analysis of 72 benign and symptomatic
cases. Neurology. 1996;46(6):1520–4.
Raps EC, Rogers JD, Galetta SL et al. The clinical spectrum of unruptured
intracranial aneurysms. Arch Neurol. 1993;50(3):265–8. 
Smetana GW. The diagnostic value of historical features in primary headache syn-
dromes: a comprehensive review. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160(18):2729–37.
Smetana GW, Shmerling RH. Does this patient have temporal arteritis? JAMA.
2002;287(1):92–101.
Snow V, Weiss K, Wall EM, Mottur-Pilson C. Pharmacologic management of
acute attacks of migraine and prevention of migraine headache. Ann Intern
Med. 2002;137(10):840–9.
Stiell IG, Clement CM, Rowe BH et al. Comparison of the Canadian CT Head
Rule and the New Orleans Criteria in patients with minor head injury.
JAMA. 2005;294(12):1511–8.
The International Classification of Headache Disorders: 2nd edition. Cephalalgia.
2004;24 Suppl 1:9–160.
van de Beek D, de Gans J, Spanjaard L, Weisfelt M, Reitsma JB, Vermeulen M.
Clinical features and prognostic factors in adults with bacterial meningitis.
N Engl J Med. 2004;351(18):1849–59.
van Gijn J, Kerr RS, Rinkel GJ. Subarachnoid haemorrhage. Lancet.
2007;369(9558):306–18.
Weir B. Headaches from aneurysms. Cephalalgia. 1994;14(2):79–87.
Wijdicks EF, Kerkhoff H, van Gijn J. Long-term follow-up of 71 patients with
thunderclap headache mimicking subarachnoid haemorrhage. Lancet.
1988;2(8602):68–70.
Younge BR, Cook BE Jr, Bartley GB, Hodge DO, Hunder GG. Initiation of glu-
cocorticoid therapy: before or after temporal artery biopsy? Mayo Clin Proc.
2004;79(4):483–91.
304 /  CHAPTER 18
Is the
headache new or
old?
Does the headache
fulfill the
pounding
mneumonic or is
it disabling?
Does the headache
fit a primary headache
syndrome?
Migraine is likely
diagnosis
Migraine, cluster of
tension headache
likely
Are there signs of
infection?
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Non contrast CT,
consider LP if
negative to diagnose
subarachnoid
hemorrhage
Consider LP to
assess for meningitis
Is the headache a
symptom of a
chronic disease?
(eg, cervical DJD, pain
syndrome depression)
Treat underling disease
Is there jaw
claudication and scalp
tenderness?
No
No
Yes
Yes
Prescribe
corticosteroids and
obtain temporal artery
biopsy
Consider atypical
primary headache
syndrome
DJD, degenerative joint disease; LP, lumbar puncture; SAH, subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Morning headaches
No
No
Consider other
causes of new
headache or new
primary headaches
No
Yes
Consider diagnosis
based on medical
history and exposures
Is the headache
of sudden onset
(thunderclap)?
Old
New
Figure 18–1. Diagnostic approach: headache.
?
20
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. U is a 48-year-old man with a BP of 165/90 mm Hg.
What is the differential diagnosis of hyperten-
sion? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
First, what is normal BP, and when is a patient hypertensive? The
first step is accurately measuring the BP. Table 20–1 summarizes
guidelines for obtaining valid BP measurements.  
The most recent Joint National Committee on Prevention,
Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High BP (JNC 7) classi-
fies BP as follows, based on the mean of 2 seated BP measure-
ments on each of 2 or more office visits:
A. Normal: systolic BP < 120 mm Hg and diastolic BP < 80 mm Hg.
B. Prehypertension: systolic BP 120–139 mm Hg or diastolic
BP 80–89 mm Hg.
C. Stage 1 hypertension: systolic BP 140–159 mm Hg or dias-
tolic BP 90–99 mm Hg.
D. Stage 2 hypertension: systolic BP ≥160 mm Hg or diastolic
BP ≥100 mm Hg.
Hypertension is either primary (essential) or secondary (resulting
from a specific identifiable cause). Causes of secondary hyperten-
sion can be organized using an organ/system framework:
A. Primary (essential) hypertension
B. Secondary hypertension
1. Endocrine
a. Primary aldosteronism
b. Pheochromocytoma
c. Thyroid disease
d. Hyperparathyroidism
e. Cushing syndrome
2. Renal
a. Chronic kidney disease
b. Acute renal failure
3. Vascular
a. Renovascular disease
b. Coarctation of the aorta
4. Pulmonary: sleep apnea
5. GI: obesity
6. Drug-induced or drug-related
a. Prolonged corticosteroid therapy
b. Nonselective nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs)
c. Cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors
d. Cocaine
e. Alcohol
f. Sympathomimetics (decongestants, anorectics)
g. Oral contraceptives
h. Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
i. Erythropoietin
j. Stimulants (modafinil, amphetamines)
An algorithm outlining the diagnostic approach to hyperten-
sion appears at the end of the chapter.
1
Mr. U’s BP is high. He has wanted to avoid taking med-
ication and has been trying to watch his diet and lose
weight. Both of his parents and several of his siblings
have hypertension. His medical history is notable only for
smoking 1 pack/day for 30 years; he does not use alcohol
and takes no medications.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Ninety-five to 99% of patients with hypertension have essential
hypertension. A family history of hypertension increases the
pretest probability of essential hypertension and is a pivotal clue in
Mr. U’s history. Patients between the ages of 20 and 50 have about
twice the risk of developing hypertension if they have 1 first-
degree relative with hypertension; the relative risk is 3–4 if 2 first-
degree relatives have hypertension. Secondary causes are quite rare
in unselected populations; estimated prevalences are 0.18–4.4% for
renovascular hypertension, 0.04–0.2% for pheochromocytoma,
0.01–0.4% for primary hyperaldosteronism, and 0.3% for Cush-
ing syndrome; these conditions may be more prevalent in popula-
tions of patients with resistant hypertension. More common con-
ditions that can contribute to or cause hypertension include either
I have a patient with hypertension.
How do I determine the cause?
314
HYPERTENSION /  315
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism, renal insufficiency, excessive
alcohol use, sleep apnea, and the use of drugs listed previously.
Table 20–2 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
Mr. U’s review of symptoms is negative for chest pain,
shortness of breath, claudication, headache, dizziness,
palpitations, weight change, constipation, daytime sleepi-
ness, and snoring. On physical exam, BP is 165/90 mm Hg
in both arms; pulse, 84 bpm; RR, 16 breaths per minute.
He weighs 220 pounds, with a body mass index (BMI) of
30 kg/m2. Fundoscopic exam shows some arteriolar nar-
rowing with no hemorrhages or exudates. Jugular venous
pressure is normal. Lungs are clear, and cardiac exam
shows an S4 but no S3 or murmurs. There are no abdom-
inal bruits; carotid, radial, femoral, posterior tibialis, and
dorsalis pedis pulses are normal. There is no peripheral
edema. Neurologic exam is normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Essential Hypertension
Textbook Presentation
Essential hypertension generally presents as the gradual onset of ele-
vated BP, most often in middle-aged people with positive family his-
tories. Coexisting diabetes or obesity is common but not universal.
Disease Highlights
A. Patients who are normotensive at age 55 have a 90% lifetime
risk of developing hypertension.
B. Across the BP range of 115/75 mm Hg to 185/115 mm Hg,
each increment of 20 mm Hg systolic BP or 10 mm Hg dias-
tolic BP doubles the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
The evaluation of patients with hypertension focuses primarily on
assessing other cardiovascular risk factors and assessing the
presence or absence of target organ damage (TOD). Extensive
testing for secondary causes is generally not done unless the
patient has specific symptoms strongly suggestive of a specific sec-
ondary cause or if BP control cannot be achieved. Therefore, there
are 3 objectives of testing in patients with hypertension:
A. Objective 1: Assess presence or absence of TOD (Table 20–3).
B. Objective 2: Assess presence or absence of other cardiovascu-
lar risk factors.
1. Smoking
2. Obesity (BMI > 30 kg/m2)
3. Physical inactivity
4. Dyslipidemia
5. Diabetes
6. Microalbuminuria or estimated glomerular filtration rate
(GFR) < 60 mL/min
7. Age (> 55 for men, > 65 for women)
8. Family history of premature cardiovascular disease (men <
55, women < 65)
C. Objective 3: Identify secondary hypertension.
1. In the absence of any of the clinical clues listed previously,
it is unlikely that the patient has renal artery stenosis,
hyperaldosteronism, or pheochromocytoma.
2. Testing should focus on screening for more common causes
or contributors to hypertension, such as renal or thyroid
disease, that are easily diagnosed with simple blood tests.
Initial testing in a patient with hypertension and no
clinical clues should include an ECG, electrolytes,
BUN, creatinine, calcium, TSH, urine albumin–
creatinine ratio, fasting glucose, and fasting lipid
panel (total cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein
[HDL], triglycerides, low-density lipoprotein [LDL]).
Treatment 
A. Treatment goals
1. Reduce BP.
a. Target of < 130/80 mm Hg if patient also has diabetes
or renal disease
b. Target of < 140/90 mm Hg for everyone else
2. Modify other cardiovascular risk factors.
Table 20–1. Guidelines for measuring BP.
• The patient should sit for several minutes in a quiet room before BP measurements are taken. Pain, stress, a full urinary bladder, a recent meal, and
talking or active listening during measurement affect BP. Having smoked a cigarette within 15–20 minutes can elevate the BP by 5–20 mm Hg.
• Take at least 2 measurements spaced by 1–2 minutes and additional measurements if the first 2 are quite different.
• Using a bladder that is too narrow yields false high readings. Instead of the standard cuff (12–13 cm long, 35 cm wide) use an appropriate larger
cuff in patients with increased arm circumference.
• Use phase I (first tapping sound) and V (disappearance) Korotkoff sounds to identify systolic and diastolic BP values, respectively.
• Do not deflate the cuff too rapidly, otherwise individual Korotkoff sounds are missed and too low a value is measured; start with a deflation rate of
2 mm/s.
• Measure the heart rate by palpation and watch out for arrhythmia, which mandates repeated BP measurements.
• At the first visit, measure BP in both arms and take the higher value as the reference; measure BP at 1 minute and 5 minutes after standing upright
if the patient has a disorder that frequently causes orthostatic hypotension.
Adapted, with permission, from Messerli FH, Williams B, Ritz E. Essential hypertension. Lancet. 2007;370:591–603.
316 /  CHAPTER 20
B. Nonpharmacologic approaches to treating hypertension
(Tables 20–4 and 20–5)
1. 2–6 months is a reasonable length of time for a trial of
lifestyle modification
2. Should be discussed with all patients, even if medication
also necessary
C. Overview of pharmacologic treatment of hypertension
1. In general, can divide patients into those who have other
diseases that would guide choice of therapy (called
Table 20–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. U.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Essential
Family history
hypertension
Obesity
Coexistent
diabetes
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Chronic kidney
Often none
Serum creatinine,
disease
Sometimes 
estimated GFR
edema, malaise
Sleep apnea
Obesity (> 120%
Polysomnogram
ideal body weight) 
Neck circumference
> 17 in
Frequent snoring
Daytime sleepiness
Witnessed apnea
Thyroid 
Hyperthyroidism:
TSH
disease
Weight loss
Loose stools 
Palpitations
Sweating;
Hypothyroidism:
Weight gain
Constipation
Fatigue
Alcohol
Alcohol history
Alcohol history
CAGE
questionnaire
Drug/medication
Medication/drug 
Medication/drug 
use
history
history
Other Hypotheses
Renal artery
Abrupt onset or 
MRA with 
stenosis
accelerated 
gadolinium
hypertension
CT angiography
Azotemia after use
of ACE inhibitor 
Hypertension refractory
to ≥3 medications
Abdominal or flank bruit 
Other vascular disease
(coronary, carotid, or
peripheral)
Smoking 
Severe retinopathy
Hyperaldosteronism
Resistant
Aldosterone/
hypertension
renin ratio
Hypokalemia
Pheochromocytoma
Labile BP/paroxysmal
Plasma 
hypertension
metanephrine
Headache
Sweating
Orthostasis
Tachycardia
Table 20–3. Assessing target organ damage in patients
with hypertension.
Clinical
Target organ
manifestations
Important tests
Heart 
Left ventricular
Physical exam
hypertrophy
ECG 
Echocardiography in
selected patients
Coronary artery
History 
disease (angina,
ECG 
myocardial infarction)
Stress test in 
selected patients
Heart failure
History
Physical exam 
Echocardiography
Brain
Stroke, transient
History 
ischemic attack
Physical exam
Kidneys 
Proteinuria 
Albumin/creatinine 
Chronic kidney
ratio 
disease
Serum creatinine
Eyes
Retinopathy 
Fundoscopic or
ophthalmologic exam
Peripheral
Peripheral vascular 
History and physical 
vasculature
disease
exam 
ABI measurements in
selected patients
Table 20–4. Nonpharmacologic approaches to managing
hypertension.
Approximate reduction 
Intervention
in systolic BP
Weight reduction
5–20 mm Hg/10 kg weight loss
DASH diet (see Table 20–5)
8–14 mm Hg
Reduced sodium diet
2–8 mm Hg
(< 2.4 g sodium/day)
Aerobic exercise, 30 minutes/day,
4–9 mm Hg
several days/week
Limitation of alcohol
2–4 mm Hg
consumption to ≤2 drinks/day
for men and ≤1 drink/day
for women
HYPERTENSION /  317
“compelling indications” by JNC 7) and those without
such compelling indications
a. No compelling indications
(1) Start with thiazide diuretic.
(2) Add ACE inhibitor, β-blocker, angiotensin recep-
tor blocker (ARB), or calcium channel blocker if
goal not reached in 1–2 months.
(3) Optimize dose of second drug until BP goal reached.
(4) Add third drug from a different class if goal not
reached on combination of thiazide diuretic and
maximal tolerated dose of second drug; do not com-
bine β-blockers and verapamil because of excessive
blockage of atrioventricular (AV) node.
b. Compelling indications
(1) Heart failure
(a) Left ventricular (LV) dysfunction without
symptoms: use ACE inhibitors and selective β-
blockers (carvedilol, metoprolol)
(b) With symptoms: use loop diuretics, ACE
inhibitors, β-blockers, spironolactone
(2) Ischemic heart disease
(a) Stable angina: use β-blockers
(b) Acute coronary syndromes: use β-blockers and
ACE inhibitors
(c) Post-myocardial infarction: use β-blockers,
ACE inhibitors
(3) Diabetes
(a) Most patients will need at least 2 drugs to
achieve BP goal < 130/80 mm Hg.
(b) Use thiazide diuretic and ACE inhibitor or
ARB initially.
(c) Can add β-blocker or calcium channel blocker
in patients who need a third drug.
(4) Chronic kidney disease
(a) Use ACE inhibitor or ARB.
(b) If creatinine > 2.5 mg/dL or estimated GFR <
20 mL/min, use loop diuretic instead of thiazide.
(5) Cerebrovascular disease
(a) Use combination of thiazide and ACE
inhibitor.
(b) Beware of rapid reduction of BP in patients
with acute stroke.
2. Should also consider cost and dosing frequency: low-cost
once-a-day drugs increase compliance
3. If goal is not reached on optimal doses of 3 drugs, consider
noncompliance with therapy, excess sodium intake, excess
alcohol intake, volume overload from kidney disease, use
of medications/drugs that contribute to hypertension, and
secondary hypertension.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. U’s initial test results are as follows:
ECG: LV hypertrophy by voltage, otherwise normal
TSH, 1.0 microunit/mL
Urine albumin–creatinine ratio: normal
Na, 145 mEq/L; K, 4.2 mEq/L; Cl, 100 mEq/L; BUN, 11 mg/dL;
creatinine, 0.5 mg/dL
Fasting glucose, 90 mg/dL
Fasting lipid panel: total cholesterol, 240 mg/dL; HDL, 40 mg/dL;
triglycerides, 100 mg/dL; LDL, 180 mg/dL 
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, essential hyperten-
sion? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Based on Mr. U’s history, physical exam, and initial laboratory test
results, it is not necessary to do any further testing for secondary
causes of hypertension. He does have other modifiable cardiovas-
cular risk factors (smoking, obesity, and hypercholesterolemia), and
some evidence for TOD (early retinopathy and LV hypertrophy).
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mr. U is counseled regarding smoking cessation and referred
to a nutritionist for guidance regarding diet and exercise pro-
grams. He is started on hydrochlorothiazide, 12.5 mg daily,
for his hypertension and atorvastatin, 10 mg daily, for his
hypercholesterolemia (Table 20–6). One month later, his BP
is 145/85 mm Hg. He has not yet started to exercise and
has not quit smoking. You again counsel him regarding the
importance of these lifestyle modifications and the possibil-
ity of avoiding a second medication if he exercises and loses
weight. Six months later, after changing his diet and faith-
fully exercising 3 times a week, he has lost 5 pounds, and his
BP is 135/82 mm Hg; he continues to smoke.
Table 20–5. DASH diet.
Food group
Number of servings
Grains/grain products
7–8/day
Vegetables
4–5/day
Fruits
4–5/day
Low-fat dairy products
2–3/day
Meats, poultry, fish
2–3/day
Fats, oils
2–3/day
Sweets
5/week
Nuts, seeds, dried beans
4–5/week
See http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/hbp/dash/new_dash.pdf for details.
318 /  CHAPTER 20
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mrs. X is a 66-year-old woman with a long history of
hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg
daily), lisinopril (80 mg daily), and amlodipine (10 mg
daily). Her BP has generally been in the 140–145/85–95 mm
Hg range over the last several years. At her last visit
6 months ago, she weighed 160 pounds and her BP was
140/90 mm Hg. Noting that her BP was above her treat-
ment goal, and that she was on maximal doses of 3 anti-
hypertensive medications, you suggested adding a fourth
agent. She declined, preferring to work on lifestyle modi-
fications. Today she weighs 172 pounds, and her BP is
170/95 mm Hg. She feels fine, with no headache, chest
pain, shortness of breath, or edema. Other than her anti-
hypertensive medications, she takes only pravastatin.
Her medical history is notable for smoking 1 pack/day for
40 years, peripheral vascular disease manifested by sta-
ble claudication on walking 6 blocks, and chronic kidney
disease, with a serum creatinine of 1.7 mg/dL. Physical
exam is notable for clear lungs, an S4 without an S3 or
murmurs, and decreased posterior tibial (PT) and dor-
salis pedis (DP) pulses. Abdominal exam is normal. There
is no peripheral edema, and there are no carotid, femoral,
or abdominal bruits.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mrs. X’s BP has never been very well controlled, and now her con-
trol is even worse. Since her hypertension is not controlled on
maximal doses of 3 antihypertensive medications, including a
diuretic, she meets the definition of resistant hypertension.
Although there are patients with essential hypertension who need
maximal doses of 4 or even 5 drugs to achieve control, causes of
resistant hypertension need to be considered in such patients.
These include “pseudoresistance” (inaccurate BP measurements,
poor adherence to prescribed medications, white coat hyperten-
sion [BP being elevated in the office but normal or lower in other
settings]), lifestyle factors (obesity, excessive dietary sodium intake,
heavy alcohol intake), drug-related causes (see original differential
diagnostic framework), and secondary causes (see original differ-
ential diagnostic framework). In patients with resistant hyperten-
sion, the estimated prevalence for chronic kidney disease is 1–8%,
for renal artery stenosis 3-4%, for hyperaldosteronism 1.5–15%,
for thyroid disease 1-3%, and for pheochromocytoma < 0.5%.
The pivotal points in Mrs. X’s presentation include her vascu-
lar risk factors, suggesting she is at risk for renal artery stenosis. In
addition, she does have preexisting renal insufficiency, which
could have progressed and caused her BP to increase. Her obesity
is a risk factor for obstructive sleep apnea. Another consideration
would be hyperaldosteronism, which manifests as resistant hyper-
tension, and often hypokalemia; in recent series, it has been an
increasingly common cause of resistant hypertension. She has no
symptoms to suggest another cause of secondary hypertension,
pheochromocytoma. Table 20–7 lists the differential diagnosis.
2
She reports that she takes all of her medications every
day and never adds salt to her food. She does not drink
alcohol and is afraid to use over-the-counter medica-
tions. She attributes her weight gain to being somewhat
less active due to symptomatic knee osteoarthritis. A
recent polysomnogram was normal. Laboratory tests
include the following: Na, 140 mEq/L; K, 3.4 mEq/L; Cl,
100 mEq/L; HCO2, 26 mEq/L; BUN, 35 mg/dL; creatinine,
1.8 mg/dL; TSH, 3.2 microunit/mL.
Table 20–6. Guidelines for treatment of hypercholesterolemia.
LDL levels that should
LDL levels that should 
Risk category1
LDL goal (mg/dL)
prompt lifestyle changes
prompt drug therapy 
CHD or CHD risk
< 1003
≥1004
≥1303,4
equivalent2 (10 yr risk > 20%)
2+ risk factors5
< 130
≥130
≥130
(10 yr risk 10–20%)
2+ risk factors
< 130
≥130
≥160
(10 year risk < 10%)
0–1 risk factors
< 160
≥160
≥190 (drug optional at LDL 160–189)
110-year risk calculated using Framingham model (see http://hin.nhlbi.nih.gov/ atpiii/calculator.asp)
2CHD risk equivalents: Other vascular disease (cerebrovascular, peripheral vascular, abdominal aortic aneurysm), diabetes, Framingham risk > 20%
3Some experts recommend an LDL goal of < 70 mg/dL for high-risk patients.
4Many experts recommend statin therapy for all patients in this category.
5Risk factors: Smoking, hypertension (BP ≥140/90 mm Hg, or on antihypertensive therapy), HDL < 40 mg/dL (if HDL > 60 mg/dL, decrease risk factor count
by 1), family history of premature CAD (male first-degree relative < 55 years, female first-degree relative < 65 years), age (men ≥45 years, women ≥55 years)
HYPERTENSION /  319
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Atherosclerotic Renal
Artery Stenosis
Textbook Presentation
Patients generally have either very abrupt hypertension, hyperten-
sion that worsens by > 15% over 6 months, or hypertension
refractory to treatment with 3 drugs. The classic patient with
atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis has other vascular disease
(cerebrovascular disease, coronary artery disease, peripheral arte-
rial disease) or risk factors such as smoking or diabetes.
Disease Highlights
A. Must distinguish renovascular disease from renovascular
hypertension
1. Renovascular disease means significant stenosis of 1 or both
renal arteries.
a. Can be due to fibromuscular dysplasia (most commonly
in young women) or atherosclerosis (90% of cases)
b. Does not necessarily cause hypertension and can exist
in patients with essential hypertension
2. Renovascular hypertension means hypertension caused by
renal hypoperfusion as a result of renal artery stenosis
a. Stenosis leads to renal ischemia, activating the renin–
angiotensin system, which leads to release of renin and
production of angiotensin II.
b. Although plasma renin levels are high initially, they
decrease over time.
c. Aldosterone secretion and vasoconstriction then occur,
leading to hypertension.
d. Aldosterone secretion also causes salt and water reten-
tion and hypokalemia.
e. Ischemic nephropathy occurs when renal blood flow is
so reduced that GFR decreases and there is loss of renal
function.
f. Some patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis present
with episodic, unexplained pulmonary edema (“flash
pulmonary edema”); echocardiograms in such patients
show normal systolic function.
B. About 50% of patients with renal artery stenosis have reno-
vascular hypertension.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Clinical characteristics
1. Abdominal bruits, moderate to severe retinopathy, and
peripheral vascular disease are often present.
2. Predictive value of abdominal bruits
a. Should listen over all 4 abdominal quadrants and also
spine and flanks between T12 and L2
b. Should be systolic and diastolic
c. Prevalence of 6.5–31% in a healthy population; preva-
lence of 28% in patients with hypertension
d. Prevalence of 78–87% in patients with proven renal
artery stenosis
e. Sensitivity 39–63%, specificity 90–99%
3. Family history of hypertension often absent
4. Hypokalemia often seen as a result of stimulation of aldos-
terone release; metabolic alkalosis also often seen.
5. A clinical predication model has been developed (Table 20–8);
it should not be considered totally accurate but does give an
estimate of pretest probability.
6. Response to ACE inhibition
a. A reversible increase in serum creatinine can develop in
some patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis (or
unilateral stenosis in patients with only 1 functioning
kidney) when starting ACE inhibitor therapy.
Table 20–7. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. X.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Renal artery
Abrupt onset or 
MRA with 
stenosis
accelerated
gadolinium
hypertension
CT angiography
Azotemia after use
of ACE inhibitor
Hypertension refractory
to ≥3 medications
Abdominal or
flank bruit
Other vascular disease
(coronary, carotid,
or peripheral)
Smoking
Severe retinopathy
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Worsening
None
Serum creatinine
renal function
Sometimes 
edema, malaise
Adverse lifestyle
History
History
changes (weight
gain, high
sodium diet,
excess alcohol
intake, reduction
in exercise,
noncompliance
with medications)
Use of other
History
History
medications,
especially
NSAIDs,
decongestants
Other Hypotheses
Hyperaldo-
Resistant 
Aldosterone/
steronism
hypertension
renin ratio
Hypokalemia
320 /  CHAPTER 20
(1) The peak creatinine occurs somewhere between 4
days and 2 months.
(2) Creatinine returns to baseline within 1 week of
stopping the ACE inhibitor.
b. One study reported that, in a population of high-risk
patients, a 20% increase in creatinine had 100% sensi-
tivity and 70% specificity for the diagnosis of renal
artery stenosis (defined as > 50% bilateral stenosis).
B. Imaging studies
1. Intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is the
gold standard. 
a. Can also be therapeutic through performance of angio-
plasty or placement of stent
b. Complications include bleeding, dissection, emboliza-
tion, and contrast nephropathy
2. Duplex ultrasonography (two-dimensional ultrasound
imaging combined with Doppler flow measurements)
a. Sensitivity 90–95%, specificity 60–90%; LR+ = 2.4–9;
LR−= 0.11–0.17
b. Test characteristics not as good with less experienced
technicians, and it is extremely difficult to obtain
images in obese patients.
c. Renal artery/aortic peak systolic velocity ratio > 3.5
and a renal artery peak velocity > 2 m/sec correspond
well to a stenosis of > 60%.
3. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) with gadolinium
a. Reported sensitivity ranges from 88% to 95% with a
specificity of 94% (corresponding to LR+ of ~15 and
LR−of 0.03–0.05)
b. The largest single study found that for atherosclerotic renal
artery stenosis, the sensitivity was 78% and specificity 88%
(LR+ = 6.5, LR−= 0.25); for fibromuscular dysplasia, the
sensitivity was only 22% but the specificity was 96%.
4. CT angiography
a. The range of reported sensitivity/specificity is similar
to MRA with gadolinium, but nephrotoxic contrast is
required.
b. In the study noted above, for atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis, the sensitivity was 77% and specificity 94%
(LR+ = 12.8, LR−= 0.24); for fibromuscular dysplasia,
the sensitivity was 28% and specificity was 99%.
C. Blood tests
1. Plasma renin level
a. Sensitivity 57%, specificity 66%
b. LR+ = 1.7, LR−= 0.65
2. Captopril augmented plasma renin level
a. Diuretics and ACE inhibitors held for 2 weeks; renin
measured before and 30 minutes after captopril dose
b. A positive test is plasma renin > 21 ng/mL/h, an absolute
increase of at least 10 ng/mL/h, or an increase of 150%
c. 96% sensitivity, 55% specificity; LR+ = 2.1, LR−= 0.07
Treatment 
A. Not clear which patients benefit from revascularization
B. Asymmetric renal blood flow on nuclear studies and ultra-
sonographic renal resistance index might identify responders.
C. Cure of hypertension is unusual, but number of medications
necessary to achieve control often reduced
D. Revascularization might preserve renal function.
E. Risk factor management (eg, cholesterol, smoking, diabetes
mellitus) is important.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Mrs. X suffers from claustrophobia and does not want to have
an MRI scan. Consequently, you order a duplex ultrasound to
evaluate her renal arteries. The report reads “technically diffi-
cult study; no evidence for renal artery stenosis.”
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, renovascular hyper-
tension? Have you ruled out the active alter-
natives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Table 20–8. Clinical predication rule for estimating pretest
probability of renal artery stenosis.
Points (no history 
Points (former or 
Predictor
of smoking)
current smoker)
Age
20
0
3
30
1
4
40
2
4
50
3
5
60
4
5
70
5
6
Female
2
2
Signs and
1
1
symptoms of
vascular disease
Onset of
1
1
hypertension
within 2 years
BMI < 25 kg/m2
2
2
Presence of
3
3
abdominal bruit
Serum creatinine
0.4
0
0
0.7
1
1
0.9
2
2
1.1
3
3
1.7
6
6
2.3
9
9
Lipid-lowering
1
1
therapy
Score of 9 = pretest probability of 10%
Score of 10 = pretest probability 15–20%
Score of 12 = pretest probability over 30%
(Reproduced, with permission, from Krijnen P, van Jaarsveld BC, Steyerberg
EW, Man’t Veld AJ et al. A clinical predication rule for renal artery stenosis.
Ann Intern Med. 1998;129:705–11.)
HYPERTENSION /  321
Worsening renal insufficiency and “adverse lifestyle changes” have
been ruled out by the history and unchanged serum creatinine.
Primary aldosteronism needs to be considered in patients with
resistant hypertension, especially those with hypokalemia.
Alternative Diagnosis: Primary
Hyperaldosteronism
Textbook Presentation
Primary hyperaldosteronism is usually diagnosed when a patient
with hypertension has unexplained hypokalemia.
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Results from a unilateral aldosterone-producing adenoma
in 30–60% of cases (Conn syndrome)
2. Results from idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia in
most other patients
3. Rarer causes include microadenomas, unilateral adrenal
hyperplasia, and adrenal carcinoma.
B. True prevalence unknown but could be as high as 12–15% in
selected populations of patients with resistant hypertension.
C. Pathophysiology
1. High aldosterone levels lead to salt and water retention
and potassium wasting.
2. Because aldosterone is being produced autonomously, it is
not suppressed by volume expansion, as it is normally.
3. Volume expansion suppresses plasma renin levels.
D. Most patients (50–60%) have a normal potassium level.
A normal potassium level does not rule out hyper-
aldosteronism.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Evaluation for hyperaldosteronism should be considered in
hypertensive patients with potassium levels < 3.5 mEq/L,
those with severe diuretic induce hypokalemia (K < 3.0 mEq/L),
those with resistant hypertension, and those with hyperten-
sion and an incidental adrenal adenoma.
B. The testing is complicated and may be best done in consulta-
tion with an endocrinologist.
C. The plasma aldosterone concentration/plasma renin activity
ratio (ARR) is the most commonly used screening test; it is
elevated in patients with primary hyperaldosteronism.
1. Hypokalemia must be corrected before testing.
2. All antihypertensive agents should be stopped for 2 weeks,
if possible.
a. Calcium channel blockers, α-blockers, and hydralazine
do not significantly affect the test results.
b. Aldosterone antagonists and β-blockers must be stopped.
c. ACE inhibitors, ARBs, and diuretics can cause false-
negative results.
3. Measure the plasma aldosterone concentration (ng/dL)
and the plasma renin activity (ng/mL/h) simultaneously in
the morning after the patient has been ambulatory for
2 hours; because of sampling variability, 3 separate speci-
mens should be obtained.
4. The optimal cutoff value and the test characteristics are
not totally clear, but the following parameters are com-
monly used:
a. An ARR < 23.6 rules out primary hyperaldosteronism. 
b. An ARR > 30 has a sensitivity of 90% and a specificity
of 75% (LR+ = 3.6; LR−= 0.13).
c. An ARR > 67 rules in primary hyperaldosteronism.
D. After a positive ARR, confirmatory testing should be done. 
1. Saline loading, sometimes with captopril or fludrocorti-
sone, is done to demonstrate lack of suppression of
aldosterone.
2. Adrenal imaging, usually with MRI, is done to look for
adenomas.
Treatment
A. Surgery for macroadenomas after demonstration of activity
with adrenal venous sampling for aldosterone
B. Otherwise, treat with the aldosterone antagonist spironolactone.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Because Mrs. X is somewhat overweight, and the duplex
ultrasound was technically difficult, the normal study
does not rule out renovascular hypertension. Options at
this point include performing an imaging study with a
better sensitivity, such as MRA, and testing for the
alternative diagnosis of primary hyperaldosteronism.
Considering her risk factors, renovascular hypertension
is much more likely than primary hyperaldosteronism and
should be investigated more thoroughly.
You explain why getting the MRA is important and
offer Mrs. X a short-acting benzodiazepine to be taken
1 hour before the scan. She is able to complete the test
without incident; it shows a 90% stenosis of her right
renal artery. Nuclear imaging studies demonstrate
decreased blood flow to the right kidney, and Mrs. X’s BP
fails to improve with the addition of a fourth agent. She
then undergoes right renal artery stenting, and her BP
becomes well controlled on 3 medications.
322 /  CHAPTER 20
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Mr. J is 45-year-old man with a 10-year history of hyper-
tension. When you last saw him 1 year ago, his BP was
160/95 mm Hg. He ran out of his medications 6 months
ago and was unable to obtain refills because of financial
problems. Today, he has stopped by to see your nurse for
new prescriptions. Because he is complaining of a
headache, she checked his BP and then runs to find you
because it is 220/112 mm Hg.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. J’s BP clearly needs to be lowered, and the primary question
is how quickly this needs to be accomplished. In other words, is
this a hypertensive emergency or hypertensive urgency? These
syndromes are defined by the degree of BP elevation and whether
there is acute end organ damage. A hypertensive emergency exists
when there is severe BP elevation and acute target organ involve-
ment: acute neurologic syndromes (encephalopathy, cerebrovascu-
lar accident, intracerebral or subarachnoid hemorrhage), acute
aortic dissection, acute myocardial infarction/acute coronary syn-
drome, acute pulmonary edema, acute renal failure, severe
preeclampsia/eclampsia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, or
acute postoperative hypertension. In hypertensive urgency, there is
severe BP elevation without any acute TOD. The exact definition
of “severe BP elevation” has not been established, but many
experts use a cutoff of > 180/100 mm Hg.
A hypertensive emergency is defined by the pres-
ence of clinical symptoms, not by the degree of BP
elevation.
To some extent, the degree of the acute TOD in patients with
very elevated BP depends on the time course of the BP elevation.
For example, normotensive women in whom acute hypertension
develops from eclampsia can have significant TOD at pressures of
160/100 mm Hg, whereas patients with chronic hypertension can
be asymptomatic at much higher pressures. So, despite his very
elevated BP, it is quite likely that Mr. J falls into the “hypertensive
urgency” rather than the “hypertensive emergency” category. Nev-
ertheless, hypertensive emergency is always the “must not miss”
diagnosis in such patients (Table 20-9).
3
You tell the nurse to put Mr. J in an exam room. On fur-
ther history, he has no shortness of breath, chest pain,
edema, abdominal pain, feelings of confusion, vomiting, or
focal weakness or numbness. He generally appears well
and is clearly happy to have a new job with insurance.
Physical exam confirms BP of 220/112 mm Hg, pulse of
84 bpm, and RR of 16 breaths per minute. It is difficult
to see his disks on fundoscopic exam, but you do not
think there is papilledema. Lungs are clear, jugular venous
pressure is not elevated, there is an S4 and a 2/6 sys-
tolic ejection murmur without an S3, abdomen is non-
tender, there is no peripheral edema, and neurologic exam
is normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Hypertensive Urgency
Textbook Presentation
A patient with chronic hypertension has extremely high BP; by
definition, patients have no symptoms or signs of acute TOD.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Must rule out acute TOD through history, physical, and
selected laboratory tests.
Table 20–9. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. J.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Hypertensive
Absence of 
urgency
hypertensive
emergency
syndromes
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Hypertensive
emergencies
Myocardial
Chest pain
ECG
infarction
Cardiac enzymes
Aortic
Chest, back pain
Chest radiograph
dissection
Diastolic murmur
Transesophageal 
Absent pulses
echocardiogram
Chest CT
Pulmonary
Dyspnea 
Chest radiograph
edema
Crackles 
S3
Hypertensive
Headache
MRI
encephalopathy
Nausea/vomiting
Delirium
Seizures 
Coma 
Papilledema
Acute renal
Nausea
Serum creatinine
failure
Fatigue
HYPERTENSION /  323
B. All patients should have a serum creatinine and urinalysis
performed.
C. Patients with symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia or
pulmonary edema should have an ECG, chest radiograph,
and cardiac enzymes.
D. Patients with neurologic signs or symptoms need a head CT
scan and sometimes a brain MRI.
Treatment 
A. In stable outpatients with chronically elevated BP, there is
NOT an urgent need to reduce the BP, and it is fine if it takes
several days for the BP to be reduced.
1. In patients who have stopped their medications, it is usu-
ally sufficient just to restart them.
2. Can also just choose 2 agents, such as a diuretic and either
a calcium channel blocker or ACE inhibitor, and start them
3. Oral agents that are short acting, such as captopril, felodip-
ine, furosemide, and clonidine, lower BP more quickly
than long-acting and sustained-released preparations.
4. Whether or not such patients need to be observed depends
on their reliability and comorbid conditions.
B. Too rapid reduction of BP can lead to hypotension and cere-
bral hypoperfusion.
C. IV and sublingual medications can have unpredictable effects
on BP and should be avoided in asymptomatic patients.
1. IV hydralazine causes a progressive and sometimes precip-
itous fall in BP 5–15 minutes after administration.
2. Although the circulating half-life of hydralazine is only
3 hours, the half time of its effect on BP is 10 hours.
3. Sublingual nifedipine causes completely unpredictable
lowering of BP and should never be used.
Do not be in a hurry to normalize BP in patients
without acute TOD!
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
Mr. J’s serum creatinine is 1.4 mg/dL, unchanged from 1
year ago. His urinalysis is normal. Mr. J wants to know if
he can have a couple of acetaminophen tablets for his
headache, get his prescriptions, and leave; he has to pick
up his son at school.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, hypertensive urgency?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Hypertensive
Emergencies
Acute coronary syndromes, aortic dissection, subarachnoid hem-
orrhage, and pulmonary edema are discussed in other chapters.
This section focuses on hypertensive encephalopathy.
Textbook Presentation
Patients present with the acute or subacute development of lethargy,
confusion, headache, and visual disturbances, sometimes followed
by seizures (focal or generalized) and coma. The syndrome can
occur with or without proteinuria and retinopathy.
Disease Highlights
A. Cerebral blood flow is autoregulated within specific limits.
1. In normotensive people, cerebral blood flow is unchanged
between mean arterial pressures (MAP) of 60–120 mm
Hg (mean arterial pressure = [(2 × diastolic) + systolic]/3)
a. Cerebral vasoconstriction limits hyperperfusion up to a
MAP of 180 mm Hg.
b. Above a MAP of 180 mm Hg, autoregulation is over-
whelmed.
2. In hypertensive patients, cerebral blood flow can be main-
tained at MAPs of up to 200 mm Hg.
a. Thought to be due to arteriolar thickening
b. Such patients also need higher MAPs to maintain ade-
quate cerebral blood flow (ie, abrupt lowering of the
BP to a MAP of < 100–110 mm Hg can potentially
lead to cerebral ischemia).
B. Failure of autoregulation leads to cerebral vasodilation,
endothelial dysfunction, and cerebral edema.
C. The classic MRI finding in hypertensive encephalopathy is
subcortical vasogenic edema.
1. Also called reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syn-
drome (RPLS)
2. Generally in the posterior regions of the brain due to rel-
atively sparse sympathetic innervation of the vertebrobasi-
lar territory leading to more disruption of autoregulatory
mechanisms, increased perfusion, and edema
3. Can also see changes in the brainstem and anterior brain
4. In one series, 92% of patients with RPLS presented with
encephalopathy, 39% with visual symptoms, and 53%
with headache; 87% of patients had seizures. 
5. Also seen with eclampsia and use of some immunosup-
pressive agents and cytotoxic drugs; in one series, 68% of
patients with RPLS had hypertension, 11% eclampsia,
11% immunosuppressive use, and 11% other causes
6. Reversible with treatment of hypertension or removal of
inciting agent, with MRI findings resolving in days to
weeks; long-term antiepileptic therapy is not necessary.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Hypertensive encephalopathy is primarily a clinical diagnosis.
B. A head CT should be done to exclude intracranial hemor-
rhage (intracerebral or subarachnoid bleeding).
C. An MRI should be done to exclude acute ischemic stroke and
to look for RPLS.
MRI is much more sensitive than CT (83% vs 16%
sensitivity; specificity of both > 95%) for the diag-
nosis of acute ischemic stroke. 
Treatment (Table 20–10)
A. Treating hypertension in the setting of hypertensive
encephalopathy
324 /  CHAPTER 20
1. All patients should be admitted to the hospital; many will
need to be treated in the ICU with IV medications.
2. Little or no evidence to guide choice of specific drugs or
rate of BP lowering in hypertensive encephalopathy
3. Guidelines recommend lowering the MAP by no more
than 25% in the first 2 hours and achieving a BP of
160/100 mm Hg (MAP = 120 mm Hg) within 6 hours.
4. Agents commonly used include labetalol, nicardipine, or
fenoldopam, all of which are thought to maintain cerebral
blood flow. 
B. Treating hypertension in the setting of acute ischemic
stroke
1. Most patients have acutely elevated BP regardless of pre-
existing hypertension as the body attempts to maintain
cerebral blood flow to the ischemic territory. 
2. Autoregulation is impaired in ischemic areas, so lowering
the BP can lead to a significant reduction in cerebral blood
flow, potentially exacerbating cerebral ischemia.
3. The BP elevation generally decreases spontaneously with
time.
4. Guidelines recommend treating hypertension in acute
ischemic stroke only if:
a. The diastolic BP is > 120 mm Hg and/or the systolic
BP is > 220 mm Hg
b. The patient has noncerebral acute TOD
c. Thrombolysis is planned, in which case the target BP
is 180/105 mm Hg
5. IV labetalol is the drug of choice for acute treatment
because it can be easily titrated and does not reduce cere-
bral blood flow.
6. BP should be reduced by no more than 10-15% in the
first 24 hours.
7. Oral agents should be started 10 days after the acute event.
C. Treating hypertension in the setting of subarachnoid or
intracerebral hemorrhage
1. There is no evidence that hypertension causes further
bleeding, and elevated BP might be necessary to maintain
cerebral perfusion.
2. BP should be lowered in a controlled manner when the
systolic BP is > 200 mm Hg, the diastolic > 110 mm Hg,
or the MAP > 130 mm Hg.
3. Nicardipine has been shown to be effective in intracerebral
hemorrhage.
Table 20–10. Summary of treatment of hypertensive emergencies.
Target organ involved
Preferred agents
Comments
Aortic dissection:
Labetalol
Labetalol: combined selective α-adrenergic and nonselective β-adrenergic blocker;
Must use vasodilator AND
OR
maintains cardiac output, renal, cerebral, coronary blood flow
β-blocker
Nicardipine + esmolol
Nicardipine: dihydropyridine calcium channel blocker; strong cerebral and coronary
OR
vasodilator; reduces coronary and cerebral ischemia
Nitroprusside + esmolol
Esmolol: ultrashort-acting cardioselective β-adrenergic blocker; suitable 
or IV metoprolol
when cardiac output, BP and HR are increased
Nitroprusside: arterial and venous vasodilator; decreases cerebral blood
flow; contains cyanide
Hypertensive
Nicardipine
Fenoldopam: vasodilates by acting on peripheral dopamine-1 receptors;
encephalopathy
OR 
improves creatinine clearance + sodium excretion
Labetalol
OR
Fenoldopam
Cerebral infarction
Nicardipine
or hemorrhage
OR 
Labetalol
OR
Fenoldopam
Myocardial ischemia/
Labetalol OR esmolol 
Nitroglycerin: potent venodilator; reduces preload and cardiac output;
infarction
PLUS nitroglycerin
causes reflex tachycardia
Acute pulmonary
Nicardipine OR fenoldopam 
edema/systolic 
OR nitroprusside PLUS
dysfunction
nitroglycerin PLUS loop
diuretic
Renal insufficiency
Nicardipine OR fenoldopam
Eclampsia
Labetalol OR nicardipine
Nitroprusside and ACE inhibitors should not be used in pregnant patients
Acute postoperative
Esmolol OR nicardipine OR
hypertension
labetalol
HYPERTENSION /  325
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mr. J has no signs or symptoms of stroke, intracranial
hemorrhage, pulmonary edema, myocardial ischemia, or
aortic dissection. He has a headache, but he does not
have other symptoms, such as lethargy or confusion, to
suggest hypertensive encephalopathy. His renal function
is stable and his urinalysis is normal. Although his fundi
were not optimally visualized, it is unlikely that he has
acute end organ damage considering his overall presen-
tation. There is no need to perform any further testing
at this point.
Mr. J’s previous regimen was hydrochlorothiazide, 25 mg; meto-
prolol ER, 50 mg; and amlodipine, 10 mg. You instruct him to fill
his prescriptions after he picks up his son at school, to take the
amlodipine tonight, and then to take all 3 medications in the
morning. When he returns in 2 days, his BP is 160/100 mm Hg;
3 weeks later it is 145/90 mm Hg.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Pheochromocytoma
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is a patient with attacks of paroxysmal
hypertension, headache, palpitations, and sweating occurring sev-
eral times daily, weekly, or every few months. Patients generally
have orthostatic hypotension on physical exam.
Diseases Highlights
A. 95% of patients have headache, sweating, OR palpitations.
B. 10% of pheochromocytomas are malignant and tend to have
a less typical presentation.
C. 10–15% are familial (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, von
Hippel-Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis); these are more
often asymptomatic (and normotensive) than sporadic cases.
D. See Table 20–11 for distribution of symptoms, taken from a
series of patients with pheochromocytoma, about half of
whom presented with paroxysmal hypertension and about
half of whom had persistent hypertension.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Pretest probability of 0.5% in hypertensive patients who have
suggestive symptoms
B. Pretest probability of 4% in patients with incidentally discov-
ered adrenal masses
C. Plasma metanephrine is the single best test to rule out
pheochromocytoma (Table 20–12).
1. Patients should fast overnight and be supine for 20 min-
utes prior to the blood draw. 
2. Because caffeine and acetaminophen interfere with the
assay, patients should avoid caffeine for 12 hours and acet-
aminophen for 5 days prior to testing.
3. The standard upper limit of normal for plasma
metanephrines is 61 ng/L. 
a. The overall (sporadic and hereditary cases) sensitivity
at this cut off is 99% with a specificity of 89%.
b. A plasma metanephrine > 236 ng/L is 100% specific
for the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
D. Patients with positive biochemical testing should undergo
adrenal imaging.
1. CT: sensitivity of 93–100% for detecting adrenal pheochro-
mocytomas, 90% for extra-adrenal tumors; specificity
50–70%
Table 20–12. Diagnostic tests for sporadic
pheochromocytoma.1
Sensitivity
Specificity 
Test
(%)
(%)
LR+
LR−
Plasma free 
99
82
5.5
0.012
metanephrines
Plasma 
92
72
2.9
0.11
catecholamines 
24-hour urine 
97
45
1.76
0.06
fractionated
metanephrines
24-hour urine
91
75
3.64
0.12
catecholamines
24-hour urine 
88
89
8
0.13
total 
metanephrines
24-hour urine 
77
86
5.5
0.26
vanillylmandelic
acid level (VMA)
1Test characteristics for the diagnosis in patients with hereditary pheochromo-
cytoma are different and can be found in (Data from Lenders JWM. JAMA.
2002;287:1427–34.)
Table 20–11. Signs and symptoms in pheochromocytoma.
Patients with
pheochromocytoma 
Patients with 
and 
pheochromocytoma 
paroxysmal 
and persistent 
Symptom
hypertension
hypertension
Severe headaches
92%
72%
Sweating
65%
69%
Palpitations 
73%
51%
and/or tachycardia
Anxiety/panic
60%
28%
Tremulousness
51%
26%
Chest or 
48%
28%
abdominal pain
Nausea ± vomiting
43%
26%
326 /  CHAPTER 20
2. MRI: sensitivity 90%; specificity also 50–70%; better
than CT for identifying vascular invasion
3. 131I-MIBG or positron emission tomography scanning is
sometimes used when the biochemistry is positive and
both CT and MRI are negative.
Treatment
A. Surgery is the definitive treatment.
B. Must give both α- and β-blocking agents preoperatively
1. The α-blocker opposes catecholamine-induced vasocon-
striction.
2. The β-blocker opposes the reflex tachycardia that occurs
with α-blockade.
3. Unopposed β-blockade will cause inhibition of epineph-
rine induced vasodilation, leading to increased BP, left
heart strain, and possibly HF.
4. Should be done in consultation with an endocrinologist
because of the complexities of ensuring adequate α-blockade
Never give a patient with a pheochromocytoma a
β-blocker without first giving an α-blocker.
C. 27–38% of patients have residual hypertension.
D. Patients with familial pheochromocytoma often have multiple,
bilateral tumors; the optimal approach to therapy is not clear.
REFERENCES
Calhoun DA, Jones D, Textor S et al. Resistant hypertension: diagnosis, evalua-
tion, and treatment: a scientific statement from the American Heart Associ-
ation Professional Education Committee of the Council for High Blood
Pressure Research. Circulation. 2008;117:e510–26.
Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint
National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment
of High Blood Pressure. JAMA. 2003;289:2560–72.
Doi SAR, Abalkhail S, Al-Qudhaiby et al. Optimal use and interpretation of the
aldosterone renin ratio to detect aldosterone excess in hypertension. J
Human Hypertension. 2006;20:482–89.
Krijnen P, van Jaarsveld BC, Steyerberg EW, Man’t Veld, AJ et al. A clinical predi-
cation rule for renal artery stenosis. Ann Intern Med. 1998;129:705–11.
Lee VH, Wijdicks EFM, Manno EM, Rabinstein AA. Clinical spectrum of
reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome. Arch Neurol.
2008;65:205–10.
Lenders JWM, Pacak K, Walther MM et al. Biochemical diagnosis of pheochro-
mocytoma. Which test is best? JAMA. 2002;287:1427–34.
Manger WM, Gifford RW. Pheochromocytoma. J Clin Hypertension.
2002;4:62–72.
Marik PE, Varon J. Hypertensive crises. Chest. 2007;131:1949–62. 
Mittendorf EA, Evans DB, Lee JE, Perrier ND. Pheochromocytoma: advances in
genetics, diagnosis, localization, and treatment. Hematol Oncol Clin N Am.
2007;21:509–25.
Turnbull JM. Is listening for abdominal bruits useful in the evaluation of hyper-
tension? JAMA. 1995;274:1299–1301.
Van de Ven PJG, Beutler JJ, Kaatee R et al. Angiotensin converting enzyme
inhibitor induced renal dysfunction in atherosclerotic renovascular disease.
Kidney Int. 1998;53:986–93.
Vasbinder G, Nelemans PJ, Kessels A et al. Accuracy of computed tomographic
angiography and magnetic resonance angiography for diagnosing renal artery
stenosis. Ann Intern Med. 2004;141:674–82.
Elevated BP
Confirm BP
measurement is accurate
Exclude white coat
hypertension with home or
ambulatory BP monitoring in
selected patients
Hypertension confirmed
Assess all patients for target
organ damage (Table 20-3)
Obesity
Assess for common
causes of  secondary
hypertension with
history and physical
exam in all patients,
and further testing in
selected patients
Alcohol, medication, illicit drug use
Assess for uncommon
causes of secondary
hypertension in
patients
with resistant
hypertension
Chronic kidney disease
Obstructive sleep apnea
Thyroid disease
Renovascular hypertension
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Pheochromocytoma
Cushing syndrome
Figure 20-1. Diagnostic approach: evaluation of hypertension.
?
22
347
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Ms. B is a 56-year-old woman who comes to your office
because her skin and eyes have been yellow for the past
2 weeks.
What is the differential diagnosis of jaundice?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis of jaundice, or hyperbilirubinemia, is
often organized pathophysiologically. It is helpful to review some
basic physiology first.
A. Oxidation of the heme moiety of Hgb generates biliverdin,
which is metabolized into unconjugated bilirubin, and then
bound to albumin.
B. There are 3 steps in bilirubin metabolism in the liver:
1. Uptake: The unconjugated bilirubin-albumin complex
reaches the liver cell, bilirubin dissociates, and then enters
the hepatocyte.
2. Conjugation: Unconjugated bilirubin and glucuronic
acid combine to make conjugated bilirubin.
3. Excretion: The hepatocyte excretes conjugated bilirubin
into the bile.
a. The rate-limiting step of bilirubin metabolism in the liver
b. If excretion is impaired, conjugated bilirubin travels
back through the sinusoidal membrane of the hepato-
cyte into the bloodstream.
C. Conjugated bilirubin in the bile is transported through the
biliary ducts into the duodenum; it is not reabsorbed by the
intestine.
1. Can be excreted unchanged in the stool
2. Can be converted to urobilinogen by colonic bacteria
a. Urobilinogen can be reabsorbed, entering the portal
circulation.
b. Some is taken up by the liver and re-excreted into the bile.
c. Some bypasses the liver and is excreted by the kidney,
thus appearing in the urine in small amounts.
D. Unconjugated bilirubin is not found in the urine because it
is bound to albumin and cannot be filtered by the glomeruli.
E. Conjugated bilirubin is filtered and excreted in the urine
when there is hyperbilirubinemia.
The first key point in the differential diagnosis of
hyperbilirubinemia is determining which kind of
bilirubin is elevated.
Dark, tea-colored urine means the patient has con-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Light stools, often described as “clay colored,” occur
when extrahepatic obstruction prevents bilirubin
from entering the intestine.
If there is unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (when > 80% of the
bilirubin is unconjugated), use a pathophysiologic framework:
A. Increased bilirubin production
1. Hemolysis
2. Dyserythropoiesis
3. Extravasation of blood into tissues
B. Impaired hepatic bilirubin uptake
1. Heart failure
2. Sepsis
3. Drugs (rifampin, probenecid, chloramphenicol)
4. Fasting
5. Portosystemic shunts
C. Impaired bilirubin conjugation (decreased hepatic glucurono-
syltransferase activity)
1. Hereditary
a. Gilbert syndrome
b. Crigler-Najjar syndrome
2. Acquired
a. Neonates
b. Hyperthyroidism
c. Ethinyl estradiol
d. Liver disease (causes mixed hyperbilirubinemia; usually
predominantly conjugated)
e. Sepsis
Most patients with unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binemia have hemolysis, Gilbert syndrome, heart
failure, or sepsis.
I have a patient with jaundice or abnormal liver
enzymes. How do I determine the cause?
Although many sources organize the differential diagnosis for con-
jugated hyperbilirubinemia (when > 50% is conjugated) using a
pathophysiologic framework, a more practical, clinical approach
uses the results of other liver function tests:
A. Normal liver enzymes (ALT [SGPT], AST [SGOT])
1. Sepsis or systemic infection
2. Rotor syndrome
3. Dubin-Johnson syndrome
B. Elevated liver enzymes
1. Transaminases more elevated than alkaline phosphatase:
hepatocellular pattern
a. Acute viral or alcoholic hepatitis
b. Alcoholic or nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
c. Chronic hepatitis (viral, alcoholic, autoimmune)
d. Cirrhosis of any cause
e. Drugs
2. History suggestive of obstruction or alkaline phosphatase more
elevated than transaminases, or both: cholestatic pattern
a. Extrahepatic cholestasis (biliary obstruction)
b. Intrahepatic cholestasis (primarily due to impaired excretion)
(1) Viral hepatitis
(2) Alcoholic hepatitis
(3) Cirrhosis
(4) Drugs and toxins
(5) Sepsis
(6) Total parenteral nutrition
(7) Postoperative jaundice
(8) Infiltrative diseases (amyloidosis, lymphoma,
sarcoidosis, tuberculosis)
(9) Primary sclerosing cholangitis
(10) Primary biliary cirrhosis
So regardless of how you organize this differential, the first step is to
determine whether the hyperbilirubinemia is primarily unconju-
gated or conjugated. The differential of unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binemia is relatively limited. If the hyperbilirubinemia is conjugated,
the second step is to determine whether there is extrahepatic obstruc-
tion or intrinsic liver dysfunction due to 1 of many possible etiolo-
gies. Although other liver function tests can serve as a guide, it is clear
from the way the above differentials overlap that these tests are not
very specific. Table 22–1 summarizes the commonly used liver tests.
An algorithm showing the diagnostic approach to hyperbilirubine-
mia is at the end of this chapter.
1
Ms. B also tells you she has dark urine, light-colored stools,
anorexia, and fatigue. She has no nausea, vomiting, abdom-
inal pain, or fever. Ms. B’s physical exam shows scleral
icterus and jaundice as well as marked hepatomegaly, with
her liver edge palpable 6–7 cm below the costal margin. The
liver extends across the midline. There is a palpable organ in
the left upper quadrant that is either the liver or the spleen.
There is no abdominal tenderness or distention. There is no
peripheral edema, and the rest of her exam is normal.
How reliable is the physical exam for detecting
hyperbilirubinemia?
A. Jaundice
1. Detectable on physical exam when total bilirubin is >
2.5–3.0 mg/dL
Scleral icterus is detectable before jaundice of the
skin.
2. For bilirubin > 3.0 mg/dL, sensitivity of physical exam is
78.4% and specificity is 68.8% (LR+ = 2.5, LR−= 0.31).
3. For bilirubin > 15.0 mg/dL, sensitivity of physical exam is
96.4%.
B. Hepatomegaly: The test characteristics of the physical exam
for finding hepatomegaly are not well established.
C. Splenomegaly
1. Percussion looks for loss of tympany as the enlarged spleen
impinges on the air-filled lung, stomach, and colon.
a. Dullness instead of tympany in Traube space (sixth rib
superiorly, midaxillary line laterally, and left costal mar-
gin inferiorly); in nonobese patients who have not
eaten recently, has an LR+ of 4.3 and an LR−of 0.26.
348 /  CHAPTER 22
Table 22–1. Biochemical markers used to evaluate the liver.
Aspect of 
Test
Liver Assessed
Origins
Aspartate
Hepatocyte 
Liver
aminotransferase
integrity
Heart
(AST [SGOT])
Skeletal muscle
Kidney
Brain
RBC
Alanine
Hepatocyte
Liver
aminotransferase
integrity
(ALT [SGPT])
Alkaline
Cholestasis
Liver
phosphatase (AP)
Bone
Intestine
Placenta
Gamma-glutamyl
When elevated 
Liver
transpeptidase
with AP, indicates  
(GGTP)
liver origin of AP
Bilirubin
Cholestasis
Liver
(conjugated)
Serum albumin
Reflects synthetic
Liver or diet
capacity of liver
Prothrombin
Reflects synthetic 
Vitamin K 
time
capacity of liver
dependent clotting
factors synthesized
by liver
JAUNDICE /  349
b. Dullness by the Castell method (percussing at the low-
est intercostal space in the left anterior axillary line in
both expiration and inspiration) has an LR+ of 4.8 and
an LR−of 0.21.
2. Palpation (combining studies with a variety of palpation
methods) has LR+ of 7.25–13.5 and an LR−of 0.45–0.74.
D. Ascites
1. The best 2 historical findings are
a. Increased abdominal girth (LR+ = 4.16, LR– = 0.17)
b. Ankle swelling (LR+ = 2.80, LR−= 0.10)
2. The best physical exam findings are
a. Fluid wave (LR+ = 6.0, LR−= 0.4)
b. Shifting dullness (LR+ = 2.7, LR−= 0.3)
c. Proper physical exam technique must be used to obtain
these LRs.
3. Ultrasound can detect 100 mL of ascites
1
Given the pivotal historical points (dark urine and light
colored stools) and the pivotal physical exam findings of
jaundice, massive hepatomegaly, and possible splenomegaly,
you are confident that Ms. B has hyperbilirubinemia and
suspect that it will be primarily conjugated. You obtain
the following initial tests: total bilirubin, 13 mg/dL; direct
bilirubin, 9.6 mg/dL; AST, 250 units/L; ALT, 113 units/L;
alkaline phosphatase, 503 units/L; albumin, 2.8 g/dL;
prothrombin time (PT), 15.4 s (control 11.1 s). WBC =
22,000 cells/mcL with 80% PMNs, 16% lymphocytes, and
4% monocytes.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The first pivotal point to consider is the marked hepatomegaly,
which suggests chronic liver disease, most likely due to the com-
mon etiologies of alcohol abuse or chronic hepatitis C, or both.
The next pivotal point is the pattern of the biochemical abnormal-
ities. The combination of a substantially elevated alkaline phos-
phatase and moderately elevated transaminases is consistent with a
cholestatic pattern, due either to disease causing intrahepatic
cholestasis or to extrahepatic obstruction. Viral or alcoholic hepa-
titis, with or without cirrhosis, would be the most common dis-
eases that cause both hepatocellular and cholestatic abnormalities;
the AST being greater than the ALT is a pivotal finding that points
toward alcoholic liver disease. Extrahepatic obstruction must be
considered also, since she could have an obstruction in addition to
chronic liver disease. Cancer and stricture are more likely causes of
painless jaundice than common bile duct stones. Pancreatic cancer
is the most common malignancy that causes extrahepatic obstruc-
tion; cholangiocarcinoma and ampullary carcinoma are 2 other
possibilities. Occasionally, obstruction is due to benign polyps in
the biliary tree. Table 22–2 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
Ms. B had a blood transfusion in Latvia in 1996. She has
no history of injection drug use or smoking, but she has
consumed between 2 glasses and 1 bottle of wine daily for
years. Her past medical history is notable only for Heli-
cobacter pylori–positive gastric and duodenal ulcers 6 years
ago, treated with eradication therapy. She is taking no
medications.
Is the clinical information sufficient to
make a diagnosis? If not, what other infor-
mation do you need?
Table 22–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. B.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Alcoholic
Alcohol history
CT scan
hepatitis
Hepatomegaly
Liver biopsy
Signs of cirrhosis
(palmar erythema,
angiomata)
AST > ALT
Active Alternative—Most Common
Viral hepatitis
Exposure to body
Hepatitis A 
fluids, needles, or
antibody
contaminated food
Hepatitis B 
Signs of cirrhosis if
antigen and 
chronic
antibodies
hepatitis B or C
Hepatitis C 
antibody 
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Pancreatic
Jaundice (with or 
CT scan
cancer
without pain)
MRCP
Weight loss
ERCP,
Alkaline phosphatase
Endoscopic 
elevation > 
ultrasound
transaminase
elevation 
Other Hypotheses
Common bile
Lack of pain makes 
CT scan
duct (CBD)
gallstones unlikely,
MRCP
stones
although multiple
Endoscopic 
CBD stones can
ultrasound
present painlessly
ERCP
Strictures
Painless jaundice
CT scan
or polyps
MRCP
Endoscopic
ultrasound
ERCP
Ampullary
Painless jaundice
CT scan
carcinoma or
MRCP
cholangiocarcinoma 
Endoscopic 
ultrasound
ERCP
350 /  CHAPTER 22
Leading Hypothesis: Alcoholic Liver Disease
Textbook Presentation
Alcoholic liver disease encompasses a broad spectrum of abnormal-
ities, beginning with steatosis, progressing to steatohepatitis and
sometimes cirrhosis. The amount of alcohol necessary to develop
advanced alcoholic liver disease varies among individuals, but in
general, is about 40–80 g (4–8 drinks) daily for several years. The
risk is higher for women at any given level of alcohol consumption.
1. Steatosis
Textbook Presentation
Steatosis is usually asymptomatic, with normal or mildly elevated
transaminases. Hepatomegaly is present in 70% of patients with
biopsy proven steatosis.
Disease Highlights
A. Potentiates liver damage from other insults, such as viral hep-
atitis or acetaminophen toxicity, and promotes obesity-related
liver disease.
B. Found in 50% of patients who consume > 6 drinks (60 g) per day.
C. Usually completely reversible with abstinence from alcohol,
although 1 study found that 18% of patients who became
abstinent still progressed to cirrhosis.
D. Cirrhosis develops in 37% of those who continue to drink.
Treatment
Abstain from alcohol. 
2. Alcoholic Steatohepatitis
Textbook Presentation
The classic manifestations of alcoholic steatohepatitis (also
called alcoholic hepatitis) are fever, malaise, jaundice, and tender
hepatomegaly.
Disease Highlights
A. In reality, there is a broad range of presentations, including
asymptomatic or isolated hepatomegaly; malnutrition is seen
in 90% of patients.
B. Since cirrhosis can coexist, alcoholic hepatitis can also present
with complications of portal hypertension, such as ascites,
varices, and encephalopathy.
C. Found in 10–35% of heavy drinkers, and 38–56% of those
who continue to drink progress to cirrhosis
D. 3-month mortality between 15% (mild alcoholic hepatitis)
and 55% (severe alcoholic hepatitis)
E. Several tools have been developed to risk stratify patients with
alcoholic hepatitis
1. The Modified Discriminant Function (mDF)
a. mDF = 4.6 × (patient PT – control PT) + serum biliru-
bin level
b. If the mDF is > 32, the short-term mortality rate is > 50%;
if the MDF is < 32, the mortality rate is 17%
c. For predicting mortality, the sensitivity is 67–86% and
the specificity is 48–62%.
2. The Mayo End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score
a. This score incorporates the total bilirubin, INR, and
serum creatinine.
b. An online calculator is available at http://www.
mayoclinic.org/meld/mayomodel7.html
c. A MELD score > 11 was found to have a sensitivity of
86% and a specificity of 82% for 30-day mortality.
d. A MELD score > 18 was found to have similar sensi-
tivity and specificity; a score > 20 1 week after admis-
sion had a sensitivity of 91% and specificity 85%.
3. Glasgow Alcoholic Hepatitis Score (GAHS)
a. Includes age, WBC count, BUN, PT/INR, and total
bilirubin
b. A score ≥9 is associated with a poor prognosis and has
an accuracy of 81% in predicting 28-day mortality
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Transaminases are elevated but generally < 6–7 times the
upper limit of normal.
B. GGTP (gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase) is often elevated,
and the GGTP/alkaline phosphatase ratio is often > 2.5.
C. AST:ALT ratio often, but not always, > 2
1. 70–80% of patients in various studies.
2. Another study showed mean ratio of 2.6 for patients with
alcoholic liver disease, compared with mean of 0.9 for
patients with nonalcoholic steatohepatitis; however, there
was some overlap.
D. Imaging (with ultrasound or CT) is most helpful for ruling out
other diagnoses; can variably see fatty infiltration, hepatomegaly,
ascites, or cirrhosis.
E. Liver biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosis but is not always
necessary.
Treatment
A. Abstain from alcohol.
B. Consider selected medications in severe, acute steatohepatitis.
1. In 1 study, pentoxifylline was shown to reduce mortality
and development of hepatorenal syndrome in hospitalized
patients with mDF > 32.
2. There are conflicting data on corticosteroids, but there is
some evidence of mortality benefit in selected patients: specif-
ically, those with mDF > 32 or spontaneous encephalopathy
(or both), in the absence of infection, GI bleeding, and renal
failure.
3. Cirrhosis
A. See Chapter 15, Edema for a discussion of cirrhosis.
B. The prognosis of alcoholic cirrhosis varies, depending on
whether the patient stops consuming alcohol.
1. 5-year survival of 90% if patient becomes abstinent
2. 5-year survival of 70% if patient continues to consume alcohol
3. 5-year survival of 30–50% once complications of cirrhosis
appear
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Ms. B’s transaminases are consistent with, but not
diagnostic of, alcoholic liver disease. An imaging study is
JAUNDICE /  351
necessary not to rule in alcoholic liver disease, but rather to
exclude alternative diagnoses. As discussed in Chapter 3,
Abdominal Pain, ultrasound is the best first test to look
for stones. However, in this patient, pancreatic or other
malignancies are more likely causes of extrabiliary
obstruction than stones; therefore, an abdominal CT scan
is the best first test. Tests for hepatitis are necessary in
all patients with liver disease and are especially important
in Ms. B because of her history of a blood transfusion.
Ms. B has an abdominal CT scan, which shows an
enlarged, nodular liver, moderate ascites, and a normal
pancreas. Her hepatitis A IgM antibody, HBsAg and
hepatitis B IgM core antibody, and hepatitis C antibody
are all negative.
Have you crossed the diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, alcoholic hepatitis?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Pancreatic Cancer
Textbook Presentation
Patients with pancreatic cancer often have vague abdominal pain
for weeks or months, followed by weight loss and perhaps the
abrupt onset of painless jaundice.
Disease Highlights
A. > 90% of cases are ductal carcinomas; 70–80% are in pan-
creas head and 20–25% in pancreas body or tail
B. Clinical presentation
1. Symptoms are insidious and often present for more than 2 months.
2. Abdominal pain is the most common presenting com-
plaint, occurring in up to 80% of patients.
a. Often described as gnawing, visceral pain, sometimes
radiating from the epigastrium to the sides or back
b. Sometimes improves with bending forward; worse at
night or after eating
c. Back pain is prominent if splanchnic nerve or celiac
plexus infiltration occurs
3. Weight loss is common.
4. Jaundice
a. In 80% of patients with cancers in the head; more if
mass is > 2 cm
b. Can occur when the cancer is in the body or tail but is
then due to liver metastases
c. Can be painless or associated with abdominal pain
5. Rare presentations include acute pancreatitis, malabsorp-
tion, migratory thrombophlebitis, and GI bleeding.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Multidetector CT scan (“pancreas protocol CT”)
1. Sensitivity = 86%; specificity = 90%
2. Sensitivity lower for cancers < 2 cm (71%) versus those
> 2 cm (89%)
B. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP):
sensitivity = 84%, specificity = 97%
C. Endoscopic ultrasound
1. Sensitivity = 95–98%; specificity = 75–100% 
2. Specificity = 100% if fine-needle aspiration (FNA) also
performed
D. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
1. Sensitivity 70%, specificity 94%
2. No longer used to diagnose pancreatic cancer at many cen-
ters due to complications of pancreatitis and hemorrhage
3. Still used for biliary stent placement in patients with unre-
sectable biliary obstruction and for removal of common
bile duct stones
E. CA 19–9
1. For levels above 37–40 units/mL: sensitivity = 76–90%,
specificity = 68–98%
2. For levels above 100–120 units/mL, specificity = 87–100%
3. For levels > 1000 units/mL, specificity = 94–100%
F. There is no universally accepted standard algorithm to diag-
nose pancreatic cancer
1. The choice of imaging studies depends on the expertise
available, with endoscopic ultrasound being the most
operator-dependent.
2. Most clinicians would start the evaluation with a CT scan,
followed by either CT or endoscopic ultrasound–guided
FNA if a mass is found on CT.
3. Endoscopic ultrasound is better than CT for detecting
small lesions, and should be done in patients with sugges-
tive symptoms and normal CT scans.
4. While CA 19-9 is not sensitive enough to rule out pan-
creatic cancer, very high levels are highly specific.
Treatment
A. Complete resection is possible in ~15% of patients; 5-year
survival is still only 10–25%.
B. Palliative approach for patients with nonresectable cancer
1. Biliary diversion, either percutaneous or surgical
2. Radiation therapy for pain relief
3. Gemcitabine for improved quality of life, but not
increased survival
4. Median survival is 6 months.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
With an LR- of 0.16, a normal CT scan does not always rule out
pancreatic cancer. However, in this patient, given that her 
CT scan shows evidence of advanced liver disease (a more likely
diagnosis for her), it is not necessary to do further imaging
studies. The other active alternative, chronic hepatitis, is ruled
out by her negative serologies. These test results, combined
with her alcohol intake history, makes alcoholic liver disease the
most likely diagnosis. At this point, some clinicians would pro-
ceed with treatment for alcoholic hepatitis, while others would
confirm the diagnosis and, for prognostic purposes, establish
the presence or absence of cirrhosis with a liver biopsy.
352 /  CHAPTER 22
1
Her liver biopsy showed acute alcoholic hepatitis with cir-
rhosis. Because her mDF was > 32, she was treated with 
prednisolone. She was also advised to abstain from alco-
hol. She completed the course of prednisolone and has
remained abstinent. Several weeks later, her bilirubin was
normal and she felt well.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mr. R is a 24-year-old graduate student with no past med-
ical history who comes to see you because his girlfriend
thought his eyes looked yellow yesterday. He has felt tired
and a bit queasy for the last couple of weeks but thought
he was just overworked and anxious. He has had some
aching pain in the right upper quadrant and epigastrium,
not related to eating or bowel movements. He has had no
fevers, chills, or sweats. He has noticed dark urine for 1 or
2 days but attributed it to not drinking enough.
On physical exam, he appears tired. He has scleral
icterus, and his liver is palpable 2 cm below the costal mar-
gin and is mildly tender. The spleen is not palpable, and the
rest of his abdomen is nontender and nondistended. He
has no edema, and the rest of his exam is normal.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The differential diagnosis for fatigue, nausea, and vague abdomi-
nal pain is broad, but the pivotal findings of scleral icterus and
tender hepatomegaly point toward a hepatic source. 
Mr. R’s clinical picture is consistent with that of 90% of
patients with viral hepatitis: a history of anorexia, malaise, and
nausea, and a physical exam showing hepatomegaly, hepatic ten-
derness, or both. Hepatitis A is the most frequent cause of acute
viral hepatitis; hepatitis C is the second most frequent but is usu-
ally asymptomatic acutely. Hepatitis B can also present acutely. By
virtue of being common, alcoholic hepatitis is another active alter-
native diagnosis, and the presentation can mimic that of viral hep-
atitis. Biliary obstruction is always a consideration in patients with
jaundice, but the prodrome and type of abdominal pain are not
typical. Table 22–3 lists the differential diagnosis.
Hepatitis is unlikely in the absence of nausea, anorexia,
malaise, hepatomegaly, or hepatic tenderness.
2
He has no past medical history and takes no medicines;
he does not smoke or use illicit drugs. He drinks 1–2 beers 
most weeks, and occasionally shares a bottle of wine with
friends. He has never had a blood transfusion or a tattoo.
He enjoys trying different restaurants, and frequently
eats sushi and ceviche. Initial laboratory tests include
the following: total bilirubin, 6.5 mg/dL; conjugated biliru-
bin, 4 mg/dL; ALT, 1835 units/L; AST, 1522 units/L; alka-
line phosphatase, 175 units/L; WBC, 9800 cells/mcL
(normal differential); Hgb, 14.5 g/dL; Hct, 44%.
Table 22–3. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. R.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Acute hepatitis A
Exposure to
IgM anti-HAV
potentially
contaminated food
Travel
Right upper
quadrant (RUQ) pain
Nausea ± vomiting
Malaise
Active Alternative—Most Common 
Acute
History of binge 
CT scan
alcoholic
drinking
Liver biopsy
steatohepatitis
Hepatomegaly
Ultrasound
Signs of cirrhosis
(palmar erythema,
angiomata)
AST > ALT 
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Hepatitis B or C
Exposure to
Hepatitis B:
needles/body fluids
HBsAg
RUQ pain
IgM anti-HBc
Nausea ± vomiting
Hepatitis C:
Malaise
Anti-HCV
HCV RNA
Other Hypotheses
Epstein Barr
Adenopathy
EBV, CMV 
virus (EBV) or
Pharyngitis
antibodies
cytomegalovirus
(CMV) hepatitis
Biliary
Biliary colic
Ultrasound
obstruction
JAUNDICE /  353
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Hepatitis A
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is the gradual onset of malaise, nausea,
anorexia, and right upper quadrant pain, followed by jaundice.
Disease Highlights
A. Prevalence: Accounts for 20–40% of cases of viral hepatitis in
the United States.
B. Clinical manifestations
1. Symptoms develop in 70% of adults, compared with <
30% of children under the age of 6.
2. Average incubation period is 25–30 days (range 15–49
days), followed by prodromal symptoms of fatigue,
malaise, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, fever, and right upper
pain; about 1 week later, jaundice appears.
3. 70% of patients have jaundice, and 80% have hepatomegaly.
4. Other physical findings include splenomegaly, cervical lym-
phadenopathy, rash, arthritis, and leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
5. Uncommon extrahepatic manifestations include vasculitis,
arthritis, optic neuritis, transverse myelitis, thrombocy-
topenia, and aplastic anemia.
C. Transmission
1. Fecal-oral transmission, either sporadically or in an epidemic
form
a. Contaminated water, shellfish, frozen strawberries, etc.
b. Contamination from infected restaurant worker
c. Exposure history not always clear
2. No maternal-fetal transmission
D. Clinical course
1. Generally self-limited, with rare cases of fulminant hepatic
failure (< 1% of patients with hepatitis A)
a. Fulminant course is more common in patients with
underlying hepatitis C.
b. 1.1% fatality rate in adults > age 40
2. 85% fully recover in 3 months, and nearly all by 6 months
3. Transaminases normalize more rapidly than serum bilirubin
E. Prevention
1. Vaccination is available for preexposure prophylaxis.
a. Immunity develops within 4 weeks in 90% of patients
and within 26 weeks in 100% of patients. 
b. A second dose given 6–12 months later provides per-
sistent immunity.
2. Can use immune serum globulin with or without vaccina-
tion for postexposure prophylaxis.
a. Immune globulin provides 3–5 months of protection
against hepatitis A and can be used for preexposure
prophylaxis in patients who need immediate coverage.
b. Immune globulin is 69–89% effective in preventing
symptomatic illness when used postexposure.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Liver function tests
1. ALT and AST are generally over 1000 units/L, and may be
as high as 10,000 units/L; ALT is generally > AST.
2. Bilirubin commonly > 10 mg/dL
3. Alkaline phosphatase is usually modestly elevated.
B. Antibody tests (Figure 22–1)
1. Serum IgM anti-HAV detects acute illness, being positive
even before the onset of symptoms and remaining positive
for 4–6 months
2. LR+ = 99, LR−= 0.01
3. Serum IgG anti-HAV appears in the convalescent phase of
the disease and remains positive for decades.
Treatment 
A. Supportive therapy: rest, oral hydration, and antiemetic med-
ications as needed
B. Admit if INR is elevated or patient is unable to hydrate orally.
C. Liver transplant if fulminant hepatitis and liver failure occur
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Considering the hepatocellular pattern of Mr. R’s liver test abnor-
malities, the acute onset of his symptoms, and his lack of signs of
chronic liver disease, the pretest probability for some form of viral
hepatitis is so high that it is not necessary to consider other diag-
noses at this point. Although Mr. R’s history of food exposure sug-
gests hepatitis A, it is generally necessary to test for all 3 of the pri-
mary hepatitis viruses since the exposure history for both hepatitis
B and C is often unclear.
2
His hepatitis A IgM antibody is positive, with negative
HBsAg, IgM anti-HBc, and anti-HCV.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, acute hepatitis A?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Weeks after exposure
0
4
8
12
16
20
Elevated ALT
Jaundice
Fecal HAV
IgM Anti-HAV
IgG Anti-HAV
Figure 22–1. Natural history of hepatitis A symptoms and anti-
bodies. ALT, alanine aminotransferase; HAV, hepatitis A virus.
354 /  CHAPTER 22
Alternative Diagnosis: Acute Hepatitis B
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is the gradual onset of malaise, nausea,
anorexia, right upper quadrant pain, followed by jaundice.
Hepatitis B is often subclinical.
Disease Highlights
A. Prevalence of hepatitis B virus (HBV) carriers
1. 0.1–2% (low prevalence) in the United States, Canada,
and Western Europe
2. 3–5% (medium prevalence) in Mediterranean countries,
Japan, central Asia, the Middle East, and Latin and South
America
3. 10–20% (high prevalence) in Southeast Asia, China, and
sub-Saharan Africa
B. Clinical manifestations
1. 70% of patients have subclinical infection or are anicteric;
30% of patients have icteric hepatitis.
2. Incubation period is 1–4 months.
3. Symptoms are similar to those of hepatitis A, but serum
sickness-like syndrome can be part of the prodrome (fever,
rash, arthralgias).
C. Transmission
1. In high prevalence areas, transmission is primarily perina-
tal, occurring in 90% of babies born to HBeAg-positive
mothers; it can be prevented by neonatal vaccination.
2. In medium prevalence areas, childhood infection occurs
from contaminated household objects, via minor breaks in
the skin or mucous membranes.
3. In low prevalence areas, transmission is most often sexual,
via percutaneous inoculation (eg, injection drug use, acci-
dental needlestick, tattooing, body piercing, acupunc-
ture), or from contaminated blood transfusion.
D. Clinical course
1. Fulminant hepatic failure occurs in 0.1–0.5% of patients.
2. Transaminases normalize in 1–4 months if acute infection
resolves.
3. Elevation of ALT for > 6 months indicates progression to
chronic hepatitis.
E. Prevention of hepatitis B
1. Vaccination for preexposure prophylaxis
2. Vaccination and HB immune globulin within 12 hours
for perinatal exposure and within 1 week for postexposure
prophylaxis
3. Vaccinated individuals will have positive HBsAb tests
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Liver function tests: similar to hepatitis A
B. Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) appears 1–10 weeks
after acute exposure, prior to symptoms or elevations of
transaminases (Figure 22–2).
1. Should be present in patients with acute symptoms
2. Should clear in 4–6 months
3. LR+ = 27, LR−= 0.2
C. Hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAb) appears after disap-
pearance of HBsAg; there can be a “window period” of several
weeks to months between the disappearance of HBsAg and
the appearance of HBsAb.
D. IgM hepatitis B core antibody (IgM anti-HBc) appears
shortly after HBsAg and is the only marker of acute infection
detectable during the “window period.”
1. LR+ = 45, LR−= 0.1
2. However, IgM anti-HBc can remain detectable for 2 years,
and titer can increase during exacerbations of chronic
hepatitis B.
Treatment
A. Supportive therapy: rest, oral hydration, and antiemetic med-
ications as needed
B. Admit if INR is elevated or patient is unable to hydrate orally.
C. Liver transplant if fulminant hepatitis occurs
Alternative Diagnosis: Chronic Hepatitis B
Textbook Presentation
Manifestations can range from asymptomatic, to isolated fatigue,
to cirrhosis with portal hypertension. There is often no history of
acute hepatitis B.
Disease Highlights
A. Defined as presence of HBsAg for more than 6 months 
B. After acute infection, HBV persists in the liver and serum at
very low levels; patients in whom chronic hepatitis B develops
have an impaired immune response to HBV. 
C. Risk of progression from acute to chronic hepatitis B varies,
depending on the host
1. < 1% when the acute infection is acquired by an immuno-
competent adult
2. 90% when the infection is acquired perinatally
3. 20% when the infection is acquired during childhood
D. 10–20% have extrahepatic findings (eg, polyarteritis nodosa,
glomerular disease)
E. HBsAg is generally detectable for life (0.5–2%/year become
HBsAg negative)
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
Weeks after exposure
IgM Anti-HBc
IgG Anti-HBc
Anti-HBe
Anti-HBs
HBsAg
HBeAg
Jaundice
Elevated
ALT
32
36
52
100
Figure 22–2. Natural history of acute hepatitis B infections.
JAUNDICE /  355
F. There are 4 phases of chronic HBV (Table 22–4); not all
patients experience all 4 phases.
G. Risk factors for progression from chronic hepatitis to cirrhosis
include frequent alcohol intake, concurrent hepatitis C or HIV
infection, high levels of HBV replication, and HBV genotype C.
H. Chronic hepatitis B is a risk factor for hepatocellular carci-
noma (HCC)
1. Annual incidence < 1% for non-cirrhotic chronic carriers
and 2–3% for those with cirrhosis.
2. Additional risk factors include frequent alcohol intake,
concurrent hepatitis C infection, high levels of HBV repli-
cation, and HBV genotype C.
3. Screening with ultrasound and alpha-fetoprotein levels is
recommended every 6–12 months.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. HBsAg is always positive.
B. See Table 22–4 for patterns of HBeAg, HBV DNA, and ALT
in different phases.
Treatment
A. HBeAg-positive patients have high rates of early progression
to chronic active hepatitis and cirrhosis and should be treated.
B. Asymptomatic HBeAg-negative patients with viral loads
below 105 genomes/mL and normal transaminases are usually
not treated; those with higher viral loads and abnormal
transaminases are sometimes treated.
C. Markers of successful therapy include loss of HBeAg, with
seroconversion to anti-HBe antibodies (in HBeAg-positive
patients), and reduction of the viral load.
D. True cure is rare (1–5% of patients).
E. Current treatment options include interferon alfa, lamivu-
dine, and adefovir.
Alternative Diagnosis: Hepatitis C
Textbook Presentation
Most patients are asymptomatic, with jaundice developing in less
than 25%. When present, symptoms are similar to those of other
viral hepatitis and last 2–12 weeks.
Disease Highlights
A. Prevalence
1. 20% of cases of acute hepatitis
2. Prevalence of HCV infection in the United States is 1.6% 
B. Transmission
1. Currently, 1 per 2 million blood transfusions transmit hepa-
titis C; up to 10% of transfusion recipients prior to 1990 were
infected.
Table 22–4. Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
Phase
Laboratory Findings
Histology
Highlights
Natural History
Immune tolerance
HBeAg positive
Minimal or no 
Occurs in perinatally 
Lasts 1-4 decades and then
HBV DNA level very high
inflammation
acquired HBV
transitions to HBeAg 
ALT normal
Short or absent when 
positive chronic hepatitis
infection acquired later
An immune response to
HBeAg does not occur 
HBeAg positive
HBeAg positive
Active inflammation 
Recurrent “flares”of liver 
Spontaneous conversion 
chronic hepatitis
HBV DNA moderately 
and fibrosis
enzymes that may result 
to HBeAg negative state 
(Immune Clearance) 
high; can fluctuate
in loss of HBeAg, transient 
occurs in 10–20% of 
Elevated ALT
decrease in HBV with
patients annually
persistence of HBeAg, or
Seroconversion more likely
hepatic decompensation
in older patients, those
Frequency and severity of
with higher ALT levels,
flares correlates with risk of
and those with genotype B
cirrhosis and HCC
Annual incidence of 
cirrhosis 2–5%
Inactive HBsAg
HBeAg negative
Minimal inflammation 
Can remain in this phase 
In one study, 67% stayed 
carrier state
HBeAb positive
and fibrosis; inactive 
for years or even 
inactive carriers, 4% reverted 
HBV DNA low to
cirrhosis sometimes seen
indefinitely
to HBeAg positive, 24% 
undetectable
developed HBeAg 
ALT normal
negative chronic hepatitis,
and 8% cirrhosis
HBeAg negative
HBeAg negative
Continued inflammation
Can progress to this state
Can progress silently 
chronic hepatitis
HBeAb positive
Variable fibrosis
from either inactive carrier 
for years
(reactivation of
HBV DNA detectable
Sometimes cirrhosis
state or HBeAg positive 
Annual incidence of 
HBV replication)
Elevated ALT 
chronic hepatitis state
cirrhosis 8–10%
Disease activity fluctuates,
0.5–1%/year spontaneous 
with periods of normal
clearance of HBsAg
ALT levels
356 /  CHAPTER 22
2. Now, hepatitis C is primarily transmitted through injec-
tion drug use, with occasional cases due to ear or body
piercing, sex with an injection drug user, or accidental
needlesticks.
3. Household contacts are rarely infected.
4. Transmission between monogamous partners is about
1%/year; risk of sexual transmission is higher if index car-
rier also has HIV or multiple partners.
5. Perinatal transmission occurs in 4.6-10% of cases.
C. Clinical course
1. Most patients are asymptomatic during the acute
infection.
2. Average incubation period is 7–8 weeks.
3. Fulminant hepatitis is rare.
4. Extrahepatic manifestations are common, being found in
about 75% of patients.
a. Fatigue, arthralgias, paresthesias, myalgias, pruritus, and
sicca syndrome are found in > 10% of patients.
b. Vasculitis secondary to cryoglobulinemia is found in
1% of patients, although cryoglobulinemia is present
in about 40%.
c. Depression and anxiety are more common than in
uninfected persons.
5. 15–40% of patients clear the infection within 6 months.
6. 60–85% of patients have detectable HCV RNA at 6
months and therefore have chronic hepatitis C.
D. Chronic hepatitis C
1. There are 5 stages of liver disease:
a. Stage 0: No fibrosis
b. Stage 1: Fibrous expansion of portal tracts
c. Stage 2: Periportal fibrosis
d. Stage 3: Bridging fibrosis
e. Stage 4: Cirrhosis
2. There is no correlation between ALT levels and liver
histology.
3. Although there are noninvasive techniques that can pre-
dict the degree of fibrosis (see Chapter 15, Edema), it is
necessary to do a liver biopsy to accurately determine the
activity and severity of the disease.
4. 27–41% of patients progress at least 1 stage over 5 years.
5. Cirrhosis develops in 4–24% of patients after 20 years of
infection.
a. Rates are low in community cohorts and cohorts of
blood donors (4–7%).
b. Rates are higher in other populations (24%).
c. Liver histology is the best predictor of progression to
cirrhosis.
d. Other predictors of progression to cirrhosis include age
at infection (> 40 years of age →more progression),
duration of infection, consumption of alcohol > 50 g/d,
HIV or HBV coinfection, male sex, higher ALT, baseline
fibrosis, and possibly steatosis.
e. 5-year survival for compensated cirrhosis is 80% but
drops to 50% once decompensation occurs.
f. HCC develops in 1–7% of patients per year.
E. Prevention: no vaccine available; no role for immunoglobulin
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Anti-HCV antibody tests
1. Main screening assay is an enzyme immunoassay (EIA)
a. Sensitivity of 92–95% for second-generation test
(EIA-2) and 97% for third-generation test (EIA-3)
b. Positive predictive value (true positive EIAs/all posi-
tive EIAs) is 50–61% in low prevalence populations,
such as blood donors, and 88–95% in high prevalence
populations.
c. Can be negative in immunocompromised patients,
such as organ transplant recipients, HIV-infected
patients, or hemodialysis patients, even in presence of
active viral infection
d. Positive in 50% of patients with acute hepatitis C at
time of presentation; mean time to seroconversion is
10 weeks but can occur within 4 weeks
2. Patients with high pretest probability of infection and a
negative antibody test should have an HCV RNA assay
performed
B. HCV RNA tests (Figure 22–3)
1. Qualitative HCV RNA tests
a. Highly sensitive (96–98%) and specific (> 99%)
b. Very low limits of detection (< 50 international units/mL)
c. Qualitative tests are used to confirm viremia, particu-
larly in blood and organ donation screening
2. Quantitative HCV RNA tests 
a. Specificity 96–98.9%
b. Lower limit of detection generally higher than that of
qualitative tests (~600 international units/mL), but
some newer assays have limits of detection as low as 10
international units/mL
c. Quantitative tests are used to monitor response to treatment
C. Genotype testing
1. Used for prediction of response to treatment and choice of
treatment duration
2. Genotypes do not change, so this test needs to be done
only once.
3. In the United States, 71.5% of cases are from genotype 1,
13.5% from genotype 2, 5.5% from genotype 3, and 1.15
from genotype 4.
D. When should you order the different antibody and RNA tests?
(see Algorithm, Testing in Hepatitis C, at end of chapter)
1. In a patient with acute hepatitis, order the anti-HCV EIA
first; if it is negative, order a qualitative HCV RNA, which
is detectable before the antibody.
2. In a patient with chronic liver disease or an elevated
ALT, order the anti-HCV EIA.
a. Nearly all results are true-positives, so confirmatory
testing is not required.
b. If you choose to do a confirmatory test, the best is a
quantitative HCV RNA, since the results will be used
to monitor the response to treatment; if the quantitative
HCV RNA is negative, order the more sensitive quali-
tative HCV RNA.
3. When a positive anti-HCV EIA is found in blood donors,
or in patients with normal ALT levels, confirmatory test-
ing with a highly sensitive assay is necessary.
JAUNDICE /  357
4. Immunocompromised patients with suspected hepatitis C
who are EIA antibody negative should have a qualitative test.
Treatment
A. Goals of treatment: Prevention of cirrhosis and its complica-
tions, reduction of extrahepatic manifestations, and reduction
of transmission
B. A sustained virologic response is defined as non-detectable
HCV RNA 6 months after completion of therapy.
C. Testing negative for HCV RNA at 4 and 12 weeks predicts
the likelihood of a sustained virologic response
D. Patients with higher viral loads (> 800,000 international
units/mL, equivalent to 2 million copies/mL) have higher relapse
rates and are often treated longer than those with lower viral loads.
E. Currently, the best results are seen with a combination of
pegylated interferon and ribavirin.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mr. R clearly has acute hepatitis A, presumably from con-
taminated food. Although he is nauseated, he is able to
drink adequate fluid. His INR is normal at 1.1. You recom-
mend rest and oral hydration for Mr. R, and serum
immune globulin and vaccination for his girlfriend. He feels
much better when he returns 1 month later.
The best test of the liver’s synthetic function is the
PT. It is important to check the INR in all patients
with hepatitis to look for signs of liver failure.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
May be positive
Positive
Anti-HCV antibody
test result
0
2
HCV RNA test result
JAMA, February 21,2007—Vol 297, No. 7
Patterns of HCV viremia
Continuous
Spontaneous resolution
Oscilating
Positive
Exposure
Time from HCV exposure, wk
Negative
Limit of detection
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
A
A
B
B
C
C
Figure 22-3. Patterns of HCV RNA test results. (Reproduced, with permission, from Scott JD et al. Molecular
diagnostics of hepatitis C virus infection: a systematic review. JAMA. 2007;297:724–32.)
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT
3
Mr. H is a 55-year-old man with unexpected transami-
nase abnormalities.
What is the differential diagnosis of asymp-
tomatic transaminase elevations? How would
you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The basic framework is to separate hepatic from nonhepatic
causes.
A. Hepatic causes
1. Alcohol abuse
2. Medication
3. Chronic hepatitis B or C
4. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
5. Autoimmune hepatitis
6. Hemochromatosis
358 /  CHAPTER 22
7. Wilson disease (in patients < 40 years old)
8. α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
B. Nonhepatic causes
1. Celiac sprue
2. Inherited disorders of muscle metabolism (AST elevation
only)
3. Acquired muscle disease (AST elevation only)
4. Strenuous exercise (AST elevation only)
3
Mr. H comes in for a routine appointment. He feels fine.
His past medical history is notable for type 2 diabetes
and hypertension. His medications include metformin,
atorvastatin, hydrochlorothiazide, and lisinopril. He does
not smoke, and he has a beer with dinner occasionally.
His physical exam shows a BP of 125/80 mm Hg, pulse of
80 bpm, RR of 16 breaths per minute, weight 230 lbs,
and height 5 ft 9 in (BMI = 34.0). Pulmonary, cardiac,
and abdominal exams are all normal.
Laboratory test results from his last visit include a
creatinine of 0.9 mg/dL, a HgbA1C of 6.8%, an LDL of 95 mg/dL,
a bilirubin of 0.8 mg/dL, an AST of 85 units/L, an ALT of
92 units/L, and a normal alkaline phosphatase. You then
note that his transaminases were 45 units/L and 53 units/L,
respectively, when last checked a year earlier.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In the absence of an obvious nonhepatic cause of liver enzyme ele-
vations, the initial approach is to focus on the hepatic causes. The
prevalence of the liver diseases in the differential diagnosis varies
widely, depending on the population studied. For example, in a
study of over 19,000 young, healthy military recruits, of whom 99
had enzyme elevations, only 11 were found to have any liver dis-
ease (4 had hepatitis B, 4 had hepatitis C, 2 had autoimmune hep-
atitis, 1 had cholelithiasis). A study of 100 blood donors with ele-
vated enzymes found that 48% had alcoholic liver disease, 22%
had NAFLD, and 17% had hepatitis C. In another study, patients
with elevated enzymes in whom a diagnosis could not be made by
history or blood tests underwent liver biopsy; NAFLD was found
in over 50% of them.
The pivotal points in the history and physical exam are the
patient’s diabetes and elevated BMI. NAFLD is extremely com-
mon in obese, diabetic patients, so Mr. H is at high risk for this
disease. He has no specific risk factors for chronic hepatitis, but
often the exposure history is unclear and these diagnoses cannot
be ruled out without further testing. His alcohol intake is mini-
mal, but sometimes even small amounts of alcohol can cause liver
enzyme elevations. He is also taking 2 medications, metformin
and atorvastatin, that can cause elevation of liver enzymes.
(Although statins cause transaminase elevation in 0.5–2.0% of
patients, the clinical significance is unclear, and progression to
liver failure is rare. The American College of Cardiology recom-
mends measuring transaminases at baseline, at 12 weeks, and then
annually.) The final possibility to consider at this point is
hemochromatosis, a fairly common gene mutation that can pres-
ent with liver enzyme abnormalities and diabetes. Table 22–5 lists
the differential diagnosis.
3
Mr. H first abstains from alcohol for 2 weeks; his repeat
liver enzymes show AST = 90 units/L and ALT = 95
units/L. He then stops his atorvastatin and metformin
for 1 week, with no change in his transaminases. PT, albu-
min, and CBC are all normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: NAFLD
Textbook Presentation
Patients are often asymptomatic but sometimes complain of vague
right upper quadrant discomfort. It is common to identify patients
Table 22–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. H.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Nonalcoholic
Obesity (BMI > 30)
Ultrasound
fatty liver
Diabetes
Liver biopsy
disease 
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Hemochromatosis
Family history
Serum iron/TIBC
Diabetes
Ferritin
Alcohol 
Intake history
Abstinence
AST > ALT
Medication
Medication history
Stopping the
(prescriptions and
medication 
nonprescription)
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss 
Hepatitis B or C
Exposure to body
HBsAg
fluids, needles
Anti-HBc
Anti-HBs
Anti-HCV
Other Hypotheses
Autoimmune
Other autoimmune 
Serum protein
hepatitis
disease
electrophoresis
Antinuclear antibody 
Anti-smooth
muscle antibody
Liver biopsy
Wilson disease
Age < 40
Ceruloplasmin
Neuropsychiatric
symptoms
α1-Antitrypsin
Emphysema
α1-Antitrypsin level 
deficiency
and phenotype
JAUNDICE /  359
by finding hepatomegaly on exam or asymptomatic transaminase
elevations.
Disease Highlights
A. Definition
1. A spectrum of liver abnormalities all of which include
hepatic steatosis in the absence of significant alcohol use
2. Stages
a. Steatosis (also called fatty liver [FL])
b. Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
c. Cirrhosis
B. Epidemiology and etiology
1. Risk factors include the metabolic syndrome, obesity, type
2 diabetes, insulin resistance, and hyperlipidemia.
2. Prevalence varies based on population studied
a. 20–30% in Western adults, with only 2–3% being NASH
b. 70% in diabetics
c. 91% in obese patients (BMI > 35 kg/m2) undergoing
bariatric surgery, with 37% being NASH
3. Most common cause of abnormal liver test results in the
United States.
4. Other causes of NAFLD
a. Nutritional (eg, total parenteral nutrition, starvation,
rapid weight loss, malnutrition, bariatric surgery)
b. Drugs (eg, methotrexate, amiodarone, estrogens, glu-
cocorticoids, aspirin, cocaine, antiretroviral agents)
c. Metabolic or genetic
d. Other (eg, inflammatory bowel disease, HIV, environ-
mental hepatotoxins)
C. Clinical course
1. Most patients with pure steatosis are stable and do not
develop progressive liver disease; about 12–40% develop
NASH with early fibrosis after 8–13 years.
2. Progressive liver disease can develop in patients with NASH,
with about 15% progressing to cirrhosis over 8–13 years.
3. Risk factors for progression include weight gain and pres-
ence of portal tract fibrosis on initial biopsy.
4. HCC develops in about 7% of cirrhotic patients over 10 years.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Blood tests
1. Transaminase elevation is usually < 4 times normal; AST:ALT
ratio is usually less than 1, but not if there is advanced disease
2. Serum ferritin is elevated in 50% of patients.
3. Alkaline phosphatase and GGT are often mildly elevated.
B. Imaging
1. Ultrasound for the diagnosis of steatosis
a. Sensitivity, 89%; specificity, 93%, although the sensi-
tivity may be lower for mild degrees of steatosis
b. LR+, 12.7; LR−, 0.12
2. The test characteristics of CT scan are similar to those of
ultrasound.
3. No imaging study can reliably distinguish steatosis from
more advanced NAFLD.
C. Liver biopsy is the gold standard for diagnosis and staging.
It is necessary to rule out other causes of liver dis-
ease listed in the above differential before diagnos-
ing NAFLD.
Treatment 
A. Weight loss
B. Exercise
C. Control of diabetes
D. Control of hyperlipidemia
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
You should take somewhat of a stepwise approach to
evaluating asymptomatic liver enzyme abnormalities. As
was done with Mr. H, the first step is to stop alcohol and,
if possible, potentially hepatotoxic medications, and then
remeasure the liver enzymes. Although aspects of the
history can increase the likelihood of a specific diagnosis,
the history is not sensitive or specific enough to make a
diagnosis, and it is necessary to test somewhat broadly.
If liver enzyme abnormalities persist after stopping alco-
hol and potentially hepatotoxic medications, the Ameri-
can Gastroenterological Association recommends begin-
ning with a prothrombin times; serum albumin; CBC;
hepatitis A, B, and C serologies; and iron studies (serum
iron, total iron-binding capacity [TIBC], ferritin).
IgM and IgG anti-HAV are both negative. HBsAg and
IgM anti-HBc are negative; IgG anti-HBc and anti-HBs
are positive. Anti-HCV is negative. The transferrin satu-
ration is 35%, and the serum ferritin is 190 ng/mL.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, NAFLD? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Hereditary
Hemochromatosis
Textbook Presentation
Most patients are asymptomatic, but a few have extrahepatic man-
ifestations of iron overload (see below). Some patients are identi-
fied by screening the family members of affected individuals.
Disease Highlights
A. Iron deposition occurs throughout the reticuloendothelial
system, leading to a broad range of potential manifestations.
1. In the liver leads to cirrhosis and then to HCC
2. In the heart leads to dilated cardiomyopathy
3. In the pituitary leads to secondary hypogonadism
4. In the pancreas leads to diabetes
5. In the joints leads to arthropathy
6. In the thyroid leads to hypothyroidism
B. > 90% of patients are homozygous for the autosomal recessive
HFE C282Y mutation.
360 /  CHAPTER 22
C. The gene expression is quite variable, with a high penetrance
of iron overload (ie, increased ferritin levels) but a low pene-
trance of clinical disease.
D. In a recent study, nearly 100,000 primary care patients were
screened for iron overload and HFE mutations.
1. 299 patients were homozygous for the C282Y mutation.
a. The prevalence of homozygosity was 0.44% in whites,
0.11% in Native Americans, 0.027% in Hispanics,
0.014% in blacks, 0.012% in Pacific Islanders, and
0.000039% in Asians.
b. The prevalence of heterozygosity for the mutation was
10% in whites, 5.7% in Native Americans, 2.9% in
Hispanics, 2.3% in blacks, 2% in Pacific Islanders, and
0.12% in Asians.
2. The transferrin saturation (see definition below) was > 50%
in 84% of male homozygotes and > 45% in 73% of females.
3. The serum ferritin was > 300 mcg/L in 88% of male
homozygotes and was > 200 mcg/L in 57% of females.
E. 72% of patients with serum ferritin levels > 1000 mcg/L have
cirrhosis, compared with 7.4% of those with ferritin levels <
1000 mcg/L.
F. Screening primary care populations for hemochromatosis is
not recommended by the United States Preventive Services
Task Force (USPSTF) or the American College of Physicians.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Liver biopsy with measurement of hepatic iron index is the
gold standard.
B. Initial testing should be done with a transferrin saturation
(serum iron/TIBC [TIBC = serum iron + unsaturated iron-
binding capacity]) or the unsaturated iron-binding capacity,
and a serum ferritin (the test characteristics are for identifying
homozygous patients).
1. Transferrin saturation ≥50% in men 
a. Sensitivity = 82.4%; specificity = 92.5%
b. LR+ = 10.9, LR−= 0.19
2. Transferrin saturation ≥45% in women
a. Sensitivity = 73.8%; specificity = 93.1%
b. LR+ = 10.8, LR−= 0.28
3. Unsaturated iron-binding capacity (UIBC) < 24 mcmol/L
in men
a. Sensitivity = 87.9%, specificity = 92.5%
b. LR+ = 11.8, LR−= 0.13
4. UIBC < 29 mcmol/L in women
a. Sensitivity = 81.4%, specificity = 92.5%
b. LR+ = 10.8, LR−= 0.2
5. Ferritin ≥200 ng/mL
a. Men
(1) Sensitivity, 78%; specificity, 76%
(2) LR+ = 3.25, LR−= 0.23
b. Women
(1) Sensitivity, 54%; specificity, 95%
(2) LR+ = 20, LR−= 0.48
C. Patients who have a transferrin saturation ≥45% and an ele-
vated ferritin should undergo HFE gene testing, looking for
the hereditary hemochromatosis mutations.
All first-degree relatives of patients with hereditary
hemochromatosis should undergo gene testing,
regardless of the results of the iron studies.
1. If C282Y/C282Y homozygous mutation is found
a. If age is < 40 years, ferritin < 1000 ng/mL, and
transaminases are normal, proceed to treatment
b. Otherwise, perform liver biopsy to determine severity
2. If other mutations or no mutations are found, look for
other causes of iron overload or perform liver biopsy for
diagnosis.
Treatment
Periodic phlebotomy to reduce the iron overload has been shown
to reduce the risk of progression to cirrhosis.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Mr. H’s transaminase levels remained elevated after
abstaining from alcohol and discontinuing medications,
making those diagnoses unlikely. His hepatitis A and C
serologies are negative; his hepatitis B serologies are con-
sistent with a previous infection and not chronic hepatitis B.
His transferrin saturation is normal, and the slightly
elevated ferritin is not specific for any particular disease.
At this point, you could order an antinuclear antibody
(ANA), smooth muscle antibody (SMA), ceruloplasmin,
and α1-antitrypsin levels and phenotype. However, consid-
ering his age, gender, and lack of other symptoms or ill-
nesses, autoimmune hepatitis, Wilson disease, and α1-
antitrypsin deficiency are all very unlikely. At this point,
NAFLD is by far the most likely diagnosis. An ultrasound
is not absolutely necessary, but it could confirm the
diagnosis of NAFLD.
Mr. H has an ultrasound, which shows an enlarged liver
with diffuse fatty infiltration. He begins to walk 20 min-
utes 4 times/week, and reduces his portion sizes. His
transaminases remain stable for the next several
months. One year later, he has lost 20 pounds, and his
transaminases have decreased to around 40.
REFERENCES
Adams PC, Barton JC. Hemochromatosis. Lancet. 2007;370:1855–60.
Adams PC, Reboussin DM, Barton JC et al. Hemochromatosis and iron overload
screening in a racially diverse population (HEIRS study). N Engl J Med.
2005;352:1769–78.
Adams PC, Reboussin DM, Leiendecker-Foster C et al. Comparison of the unsat-
urated iron-binding capacity with transferring saturation as a screening test
to detect C282Y homozygotes for hemochromatosis in 101,168 participants
in the HEIRS study. Clin Chem. 2005;51:1048–52.
American Gastroenterological Association. Evaluation of liver chemistry tests. Gas-
troenterology. 2002;123:1364–66.
Bialek SR, Terrault NA. The changing epidemiology and natural history of hepa-
titis C virus infection. Clin Liver Dis. 2006;10:697–715.
Brundage SC, Fitzpatrick AN. Hepatitis A. Am Fam Physician. 2006;73:2162–68.
DeWitt J, Devereaux B, Chriswell M et al. Comparison of endoscopic ultrasonog-
raphy and multidetector computed tomography for detecting and staging
pancreatic cancer. Ann Intern Med. 2004;141:753–63.
JAUNDICE /  361
Giannini EG, Testa R, Savarino V. Liver enzyme alteration: a guide for clinicians.
CMAJ. 2005;172:367–79.
Grover SA, Barkun AN, Sackett DL. Does this patient have splenomegaly? JAMA.
1993;270:2218–21.
Hung OL, Kwon NS, Cole AE et al. Evaluation of the physician’s ability to recog-
nize the presence or absence of anemia , fever, and jaundice. Acad Emerg
Med. 2000;7:146–56.
Katz MH, Savides TJ, Moossa AR, Bouvet M. An evidence based approach to the
diagnosis and staging of pancreatic cancer. Pancreatology. 2005;5:576–90. 
Mills SJ, Harrison SA. Comparison of the natural history of alcoholic and nonal-
coholic fatty liver disease. Curr Gastroenterol Rep. 2005;7:32–6.
Naylor CD. Physical examination of the liver. JAMA. 1994;271:1859–64. 
Sass DA, Shaikh OS. Alcoholic hepatitis. Clin Liver Dis. 2006;10:219–37.
Scott JD, Gretch Dr. Molecular diagnostics of hepatitis C virus infection: a sys-
tematic review. JAMA. 2007;297:724–32.
Srikureja W, Kyulo NL, Runyon BA, Hu KQ. MELD score is a better prognostic
model than Child-Turcotte-Pugh score or Discriminant Function score in
patients with alcoholic hepatitis. J Hepatol. 2005;700–6.
Williams JW, Simel DL. Does this patient have ascites? JAMA. 1992;267:2645–48.
Yim JH, Lok AS. Natural history of chronic hepatitis B infection: what we knew
in 1981 and what we know in 2005. Hepatology. 2006;43:S173–S181.
362 /  CHAPTER 22
Acute hepatitis C
infection suspected
Chronic hepatitis C
infection suspected
Negative
Positive
Not hepatitis C
OR low level,
intermittent
viremia
Negative
Not hepatitis C
OR low level,
intermittent
viremia
Repeat anti HCV
and qualitative
HCV RNA test in
4–6 months
Repeat anti HCV
and qualitative
HCV RNA tests in
6–12 months
Anti HCV
antibody
test
Anti HCV
antibody
test
Quantitive HCV
RNA
Qualitative
HCV RNA
test
Qualitative
HCV RNA
test
Immuncompetent,
no evidence of
liver disease
Immunocompromised
or unexplained liver
disease
Qualitiative
HCV RNA test
Negative
Positive
Acute hepatitis C
diagnosed
Acute hepatitis C
diagnosed
Negative
Positive
Not hepatitis C
OR low level,
intermittent
viremia
Chronic
hepatitis C
Negative
Positive
Chronic hepatitis
C diagnosed
Not hepatitis C
Positive
Positive
Negative
Testing in Hepatitis C Infection
JAUNDICE /  363
Viral hepatitis?
Alcoholic liver disease?
NAFLD?
Drugs?
Autoimmune hepatitis?
Hemochromatosis?
Elevated serum
bilirubin
Unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia
Conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia
Hemolysis?
HF?
Shunt?
Medications?
Fasting?
Sepsis?
Gilbert syndrome?
Sepsis?
Rotor syndrome?
Dubin-Johnson
syndrome?
Check other
liver tests
Check pattern of
abnormalities
Transaminases
more elevated
than alkaline
phosphatase
Alkaline
phosphatase more
elevated than
transaminases
Ultrasound,
CT, or MRCP
Extrahepatic
obstruction
Intrahepatic
cholestasis
Stones?
Polyps?
Stricture?
Pancreatic cancer?
Cholangiocarcinoma?
Ampullary cancer?
Primary sclerosing
cholangitis?
Adenopathy?
HF, heart failure; MRCP, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography; NAFLD, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease;
TPN; total parenteral nutrition.
Viral hepatitis?
Alcoholic hepatitis?
Cirrhosis?
Drugs, toxins?
Sepsis?
TPN?
Primary biliary
cirrhosis?
Normal
Abnormal
Biliary ducts normal
Biliary ducts dilated
> 50% direct
> 50% indirect
Diagnostic Approach to Hyperbilirubinemia
364 /  CHAPTER 22
Elevated AP
Repeat AP,
fasting
Intestinal source;
no further testing
necessary
Order GGTP or
5 nucleotidase
Probable bone
source
Probable liver
source
Ultrasound
or CT to look for
obstruction,
infiltration
Further imaging
or biopsy
Antimitochondrial
antibody
Primary biliary
cirrhosis
Further imaging
or biopsy
AP, alkaline phosphatase; GGTP, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase.
Normal
Elevated
Normal
Elevated
Positive
Negative
Normal
Abnormal
Diagnostic Approach to Elevated Alkaline Phosphatase
?
23
365
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mrs. K is a 75-year-old woman who complains of a painful
left knee.
What is the differential diagnosis of joint
pain? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The causes of joint pain range from common to rare and from not
particularly dangerous to joint- and life-threatening. Even the
most benign causes of joint pain can lead to serious disability. The
evaluation of a patient with joint pain calls for a detailed history
and physical exam (often focusing on extra-articular findings) and
occasionally the sampling of joint fluid and possibly analyzing
serologic tests. 
There are three pivotal features in organizing the approach to
joint pain. First, is the pain articular or extra-articular? Although
this distinction may seem obvious, abnormalities of periarticular
structures can mimic articular disease. Second, is a single joint or
are multiple joints involved? Finally, are the involved joints
inflamed or not? 
The first pivotal point in making a diagnosis in a patient with
joint pain is to determine whether the patient’s pain is truly artic-
ular, real joint pain, or periarticular. 
The differential diagnosis below is organized by these pivotal
points: the number of joints involved (monoarticular vs polyartic-
ular) and by whether or not the joint is inflamed (judged by phys-
ical exam, joint fluid analysis, or both). Recognize that all of the
monoarticular arthritides can present in a polyarticular distribu-
tion, and classically polyarticular diseases may occasionally only
affect a single joint. 
The joint distribution of diseases that cause joint
pain is variable; monoarticular arthritides may pres-
ent with polyarticular findings and vice versa.
A. Monoarticular arthritis
1. Inflammatory
a. Infectious
(1) Gonococcal arthritis
(2) Nongonococcal septic arthritis
(3) Lyme disease
b. Crystalline
(1) Monosodium urate (gout)
(2) Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition dis-
ease (CPPD or pseudogout)
2. Noninflammatory
a. Osteoarthritis (OA)
b. Traumatic
c. Avascular necrosis
B. Polyarticular arthritis
1. Inflammatory
a. Rheumatologic
(1) Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
(2) Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
(3) Psoriatic arthritis
(4) Other rheumatic diseases
b. Infectious
(1) Bacterial
(a) Bacterial endocarditis
(b) Lyme disease
(2) Viral
(a) Rubella
(b) Hepatitis B
(c) HIV
(d) Parvovirus
(3) Postinfectious
(a) Enteric
(b) Urogenital
(c) Rheumatic fever
2. Noninflammatory: OA
1
Mrs. K’s symptoms started after she stepped down from
a bus with unusual force. The pain became intolerable
within about 6 hours of onset and has been present for
3 days now. She otherwise feels well. She reports no
fevers, chills, dietary changes, or sick contacts.
On physical exam she is in obvious pain, limping into
the exam room on a cane. Her vital signs are tempera-
ture, 37.0°C; RR, 12 breaths per minute; BP, 110/70 mm
Hg; pulse, 80 bpm. The only abnormality on exam is the
(continued)
I have a patient with joint pain.
How do I determine the cause?
right knee. It is red, warm to the touch, and tender to
palpation. The range of motion is limited to only about
20 degrees.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Pivotal points in this case are that the patient’s symptoms clearly
localize to articular, rather than periarticular structures since the
exam reveals an inflamed joint with limited range of motion.
Therefore, the differential diagnosis focuses primarily on the
causes of inflammatory monoarticular arthritis, such as septic
arthritis, gout, pseudogout, and trauma.
Salient points of the patient’s presentation are the rapid onset
of the pain; the mild, antecedent trauma; and the lack of systemic
symptoms, such as fever, fatigue, or weight loss.
Given the patient’s age, the single inflamed joint, and high
incidence of gout, this diagnosis is the leading hypothesis. CPPD
(also called pseudogout) is common in the knee of elderly
patients, so this must also be high in the differential diagnosis.
Traumatic injury to the knee, such as a meniscal injury or intra-
articular fracture, are probably less likely given the mild nature of
the injury and the inflammation of the joint.
An infectious arthritis is probably less likely, given the sudden
onset and lack of systemic symptoms, but are must not miss
hypotheses since they are potentially disastrous if left untreated.
Gonococcal and nongonococcal septic arthritis are possibilities.
Lyme disease can affect multiple joints but most commonly causes
a monoarticular arthritis of the knee. Table 23–1 lists the differ-
ential diagnosis.
1
Mrs. K has never had a similar episode before. Her other
medical problems include diabetes with diabetic nephropa-
thy, hypertension, and hypercholesterolemia. Her medica-
tions are insulin, enalapril, atorvastatin, and hydrochloroth-
iazide. There is no history of alcohol or drug abuse.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Gout
Textbook Presentation
Gout classically presents in older patients with acute and severe
pain of the great toe. The pain generally begins acutely and
becomes unbearable within hours of onset. Patients often say that
they are not even able to place a bed sheet over the toe. On phys-
ical exam, the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint is warm,
swollen, and red.
Disease Highlights
A. Gout is the most common crystal-induced arthropathy.
B. Gouty attacks occur when sodium urate crystallizes in syn-
ovial fluid inducing an inflammatory response and causing an
abrupt, remarkably painful arthritis.
C. The primary risk factor for gout is hyperuricemia.
D. Location
1. The classic location for gout is the first MTP joint (podagra).
2. The joints of the lower extremities and the elbows are also
common sites.
E. Gouty attacks often occur after abrupt changes in uric acid
levels. Common causes are:
1. Large protein meals
2. Alcohol binges
3. Initiation of thiazide or loop diuretics
4. New renal failure
F. Gouty attacks can also be induced by trauma, hospitalization,
or surgery.
G. The initial attack nearly always involves a single joint, while
later attacks may be polyarticular.
H. Forms of gout
1. Acute gouty arthritis is by far the most common type of gout.
2. Chronic arthritis can develop in patients who have untreated
hyperuricemia.
366 /  CHAPTER 23
Table 23–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. K.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Gout
Previous episodes
Classic presentation 
Rapid onset
or demonstration 
Involvement of first
of sodium urate 
MTP joint
crystals in synovial fluid
Active Alternative
CPPD
May present as 
Demonstration of 
(pseudogout)
chronic or acute
crystals in synovial 
arthritis
fluid or classic
radiographic findings
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Bacterial
Fever with 
Positive synovial 
arthritis
monoarticular or 
(or other body) 
(gonococcal or
polyarticular 
fluid cultures
nongonococcal)
arthritis
Lyme disease
Exposure to
Clinical history
endemic area
Serologies
History of tick bite
Response to 
Rash
treatment
Other Alternative
Traumatic injury
Usually history of
Appropriate imaging
severe trauma
(radiograph for
fracture, MRI for
cartilaginous injury)
JOINT PAIN /  367
3. Tophaceous gout occurs when there is macroscopic depo-
sition of sodium urate crystals in and around joints.
4. The kidney can also be affected by gout. Patients can
develop sodium urate stones or a urate nephropathy.
I. Evaluation of a patient with gout
1. Patients with a new diagnosis of gout should be evaluated
for alcoholism, renal insufficiency, myeloproliferative dis-
orders, and hypertension.
2. Patients in whom gout first occurs in their teens and twen-
ties should be evaluated for disorders of purine metabolism.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Acute, inflammatory, monoarticular arthritis is an absolute
indication for arthrocentesis.
B. Sampling synovial fluid will not only rule out potentially joint
destroying septic arthritis but will also usually make a diagnosis.
Every acute, inflammatory joint effusion should be
tapped.
C. Arthrocentesis
1. Joint fluid is routinely sent for cell count, Gram stain, cul-
ture, and crystal analysis.
2. Normal joint fluid is small in volume and clear with a very
low cell count.
3. Characteristics of abnormal synovial fluid are shown in
Table 23–2. These numbers should be used as estimates.
4. Joint fluid obtained during an acute flare of a crystal
arthritis will be highly inflammatory in nature.
5. The only setting in which it is reasonable not to tap a
monoarticular effusion is when a septic joint is extremely
unlikely and there is truly no diagnostic question. This
may be the case
a. When a patient has recurrent inflammatory flares sec-
ondary to documented process (gout).
b. When the diagnosis is clear (podagra for gout or joint
trauma in a patient with a bleeding diathesis for
hemarthrosis).
D. Clinical diagnosis
1. Despite the crucial role of arthrocentesis in the diagnosis
of acute monoarticular arthritis, the diagnosis of gout can
occasionally be made with some certainty without joint
aspiration.
2. The following clinical points make a diagnosis of gout probable:
a. More than 1 attack of acute arthritis
b. Maximal inflammation in < 1 day
c. Monoarthritis
d. Joint erythema
e. First MTP involvement
f. Unilateral MTP arthritis
g. Unilateral tarsal acute arthritis
h. Tophus
i. Asymmetric joint swelling
j. Hyperuricemia
k. Bone cysts without erosion on radiograph 
l. Negative joint fluid culture
3. The test characteristics of a combination of these findings
are provided in Table 23–3.
4. The presence of six findings highly consistent with gout
rules in the diagnosis even without arthrocentesis. 
5. Fever may accompany acute attacks.
a. Present in 44% of patients
b. 10% of patients have fevers > 39.0°C
6. Other findings that make gout more probable are
a. Hypertension
b. Use of thiazide or loop diuretics
c. Obesity
d. Alcohol use
Table 23–2. Characteristics of synovial fluid.
RA or Similar
Acute Crystal or 
Characteristic
Normal
OA
Arthritides
Septic Arthritis
Color and clarity
Yellow and clear
Yellow and clear
Yellow green and cloudy
Yellow green and opaque
Volume 
0–4 mL
1–10 mL
5–50 mL
15–50 mL
WBC/mcL
< 500
< 2000
1000–50,000
10,000–100,000
%PMN
< 25
< 50
> 50
> 75
OA, osteoarthritis; PMN, polymorphonuclear; RA, rheumatoid arthritis.
Table 23–3. Test characteristics of combined findings for
the diagnosis of gout.
Criteria
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
6 or more of the
87%
96%
22
0.13
clinical points1
5 or more of the
95%
89%
8.6
0.05
clinical points1
Serum uric acid
90%
54%
1.9
0.19
> 7 mg/dL
1See text for list of clinical points.
Modified from Black ER. Diagnostic strategies for common medical prob-
lems. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 1999: p. 396.
FP
368 /  CHAPTER 23
Treatment
A. Therapy for gout is classified as either abortive (to treat an
acute flare) or prophylactic (to prevent flares and the destruc-
tive effects on the joints and kidneys).
B. Abortive therapy is outlined in Table 23–4.
1. All of the therapies are effective, and the choice is usually
made by the potential adverse effects.
2. Most frequently, patients will be treated with a combina-
tion of a potent nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
(NSAID) and colchicine.
C. Prophylactic therapy
1. There are 5 basic indications for prophylactic therapy:
a. Frequent attacks
b. Disabling attacks
c. Urate nephrolithiasis
d. Urate nephropathy
e. Tophaceous gout
2. Prophylactic therapy should begin with nonpharmaco-
logic interventions to decrease uric acid levels and decrease
the risk of gouty flares.
a. Abstinence from alcohol use
b. Weight loss
c. Discontinuation of medications that impair urate
excretion (eg, aspirin, thiazide diuretics).
3. Potential prophylactic treatments are listed below.
a. NSAIDs
b. Colchicine
c. Allopurinol
d. Probenecid
e. Sulfinpyrazone
f. Febuxostat
4. Colchicine should be used during the initiation of urate-
lowering therapy to prevent recurrent gouty flares.
a. NSAIDs may be added if necessary.
b. Colchicine is usually continued for the first 6 months
of urate-lowering therapy.
5. Allopurinol is usually the first antihyperuricemic drug
used, although it is relatively contraindicated in patients
with renal or hepatic insufficiency.
6. If allopurinol is ineffective, uric acid excretion should be
measured. Patients with low uric acid excretion (present in
80% of patients with gout) should be given a uricosuric
agent, such as probenecid.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
The evaluation of this patient clearly requires joint aspiration.
Septic arthritis is in the differential of any acutely inflamed joint.
Although Mrs. K has only 4 criteria for gout (maximal inflamma-
tion in < 1 day, monoarthritis, joint erythema, and asymmetric
joint swelling), gout remains likely, especially given the presence of
hypertension and her use of a thiazide.
1
Radiographs of the knee demonstrate evidence of mild
OA but no evidence of fracture. Joint fluid is aspirated
from the patient’s knee.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, gout? Have you ruled
out the active alternatives? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: CPPD
Textbook Presentation
CPPD generally presents in older patients. It may present with an
acute flare (pseudogout) or, more commonly, as a degenerative
arthritis with suspicious radiographic findings that distinguish it
from OA. Patients often have other diseases associated with
CPPD, such as hyperparathyroidism.
Disease Highlights
A. CPPD is a crystal-induced arthropathy that can be clinically
indistinguishable from gout, except for the presence of cal-
cium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystals in the joint fluid.
B. Like gout, it is caused by the inflammatory response to crys-
tals in the synovial space.
C. There are many other similarities between pseudogout
and gout.
1. Both cause acute painful monoarticular attacks.
2. Both can cause polyarticular flares.
3. Flares can be induced by trauma or illness.
4. Both can potentially cause destructive arthropathy.
5. Incidence increases with age.
D. There are some aspects of the disease quite distinct from gout.
1. Episodic “gout-like” flares only occur in a small percentage
of patients.
2. CPPD commonly manifests as a degenerative arthritis (in
about 50% of patients).
3. It has highly specific radiologic features.
4. It most commonly affects the knee.
Table 23–4. Immediate therapies for gout with potential
adverse effects.
Therapy
Potential Adverse Effects
Nonsteroidal
Nephrotoxicity
anti inflammatory drugs
GI toxicity
Colchicine
GI toxicity (diarrhea)
Oral corticosteroids
GI toxicity
Hyperglycemia
Intra-articular
Complications of joint 
corticosteroids
injection 
Hyperglycemia
JOINT PAIN /  369
Although CPPD is commonly thought of as pseudo-
gout, it more commonly presents as a chronic degen-
erative arthritis.
E. Pseudogout has been associated with a number of diseases, the
most common of which are:
1. Hyperparathyroidism
2. Hypocalciuric hypercalcemia
3. Hemochromatosis
4. Hypothyroidism
5. Gout
6. Hypomagnesemia
7. Hypophosphatasia
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Definite diagnosis of CPPD arthritis requires demonstration
of the calcium pyrophosphate crystals in synovial fluid.
B. Certain radiographic findings are quite suggestive. The classic
findings are punctate and linear calcific densities, most com-
monly seen in the cartilage of the knees, hip, pelvis, and wrist.
C. Proposed criteria offer findings that should alert the physician
to the possibility of CPPD:
1. Acute arthritis of a large joint, especially the knees, in the
absence of hyperuricemia.
2. Chronic arthritis with acute flares.
3. Chronic arthritis that involves joints that would be atypi-
cal for OA such as the wrists, metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
joints, and shoulders.
D. Evaluation of a patient with pseudogout should include test-
ing for related diseases. The evaluation generally includes
measuring the levels of the following:
1. Calcium
2. Magnesium
3. Phosphorus
4. Alkaline phosphatase
5. Iron, ferritin, and total iron-binding capacity (TIBC)
6. TSH
7. Uric acid
Treatment
A. Treat an associated underlying disease, when present.
B. Acute attacks can be managed with
1. NSAIDs
2. Joint aspiration with corticosteroid injection
3. Colchicine
C. Chronic degenerative arthritis is difficult to treat. NSAIDs are
usually used.
Alternative Diagnosis: Septic Arthritis
Textbook Presentation
Septic arthritis usually presents as subacute joint pain, the knee
being most common, associated with low-grade fever and pro-
gressive pain and disability. Because the infection usually begins
with hematogenous spread, a risk factor for bacteremia (such as
injection drug use) is sometimes present.
Disease Highlights
A. Septic arthritis usually occurs via hematogenous spread of
bacteria.
B. Joint distribution
1. The knee is the most commonly affected joint.
2. Monoarticular arthritis is the rule, with multiple joints
involved in < 15% of patients.
3. Infection is most common in previously abnormal joints,
such as those affected by OA or RA.
C. Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism followed
by species of streptococcus.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Clinical findings
1. Fever is common, present in most patients.
a. A recent meta-analysis found that 57% of patients with
septic arthritis had fever.
b. Recognize that this means that over 40% of patients
with septic arthritis are afebrile.
c. Fever > 39.0°C is rare.
2. Findings predictive of a septic arthritis causing joint pain
are recent joint surgery (LR+ 6.9) and the presence of a
prosthetic knee or hip in the presence of a skin infection
(LR+ 15.0).
Fever cannot distinguish septic arthritis from other
forms of monoarticular arthritis. Patients with gout
may be febrile while those with septic joints may not.
B. Laboratory findings
1. WBC > 10,000/mcL is seen in only 50% of patients.
2. Definitive diagnosis is made by Gram stain and culture.
a. Gram stain of synovial fluid is positive in about 75% of
patients with septic arthritis. 
b. The yield is highest with S aureus.
3. Elevated synovial fluid WBC count can be predictive in
making the diagnosis.
a. Synovial fluid WBC count > 100,000/mcL: LR+ 28,
LR+ 0.71.
b. Lower WBC cut offs are not predictive.
4. Joint fluid culture is positive in about 90% of cases.
5. Blood (and sputum, when appropriate) should also be cul-
tured as this may help identify an organism if one is not
isolated from the synovium. About 50% of patients will
have positive blood cultures.
Because of the potential for septic arthritis to cause
joint destruction, a single, acutely inflamed joint
should be assumed infected until proved otherwise.
Treatment
A. Antibiotic therapy is directed by Gram stain findings.
B. Empiric therapy should cover S aureus.
C. The affected joint should also be drained, either with a needle,
arthroscope, or arthrotomy (opening the joint in the operating
room).
370 /  CHAPTER 23
1. Small joints can usually be drained and lavaged with serial
arthrocentesis.
2. Large joints usually require surgical drainage.
3. The knee is an exception, a large joint that, in many cases
can be treated with serial arthrocentesis. 
E. Patients who receive treatment within 5 days of symptom
onset have the best prognosis.
Alternative Diagnosis: Disseminated
Gonorrhea
Textbook Presentation
Disseminated gonorrhea is classically seen in young, sexually
active women who have fever and joint pain. The most common
presentation is severe pain of the wrists, hands, and knees with
warmth and erythema diffusely over the backs of the hands. A rash
may sometimes be present.
Disease Highlights
A. Disseminated gonorrhea is a disease with rheumatologic man-
ifestations that is seen in young, sexually active persons. 
B. Women are 3 times more likely to have the disease than men.
Disseminated gonorrhea usually occurs in patients
without a history of a recent sexually transmitted
disease.
C. Disseminated gonorrhea seems to present in 1 of 2 ways (with
a good deal of overlap): a classic septic arthritis or a triad of
tenosynovitis, dermatitis, and arthralgia.
1. The triad presentation seems to reflect a high-grade bac-
teremia with reactive features.
2. The tenosynovitis presents predominantly as a pol-
yarthralgia of the hands and wrists.
3. The rash is a scattered, papular, or vesicular rash.
4. The more classic, monoarticular septic joint presentation
occurs in about 40% of patients.
5. Table 23–5 gives the frequency of various findings in these
2 types of presentation.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is based on isolating the organism.
B. Besides synovial fluid cultures, blood, pharyngeal, and genital
cultures should also be sent.
C. If all cultures are negative, the disease can still be diagnosed if
there is a high clinical suspicion and a rapid response to
appropriate antibiotics.
Negative cultures do not necessarily exclude the
diagnosis of disseminated gonorrhea.
Treatment
A. Ceftriaxone 1 g IV or IM every 24 hours or cefotaxime 1 g IV
every 8 hour.
B. IV therapy is generally recommended for 24–48 hours after
improvement.
Alternative Diagnosis: Lyme Disease
Textbook Presentation
Lyme disease presents in different ways at different stages of the
disease. A classic presentation of the joint symptoms is a patient
with acute, inflammatory knee pain who has been in an area where
the disease is endemic. There may be a history of a previous tick
bite, rash, or nonspecific febrile illness.
Disease Highlights
A. Lyme disease is caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi,
transmitted by a number of species of Ixodes ticks.
B. The tick most commonly transmits the disease during its
nymphal stage.
C. The disease is endemic in certain places. 
1. In the United States: along the northern Atlantic Coast; in
Wisconsin and Minnesota; in California and Oregon
2. In Europe: Germany; Austria; Slovenia; Sweden
D. The clinical picture differs somewhat between that in the
United States and that in Europe and Asia. The presentation
in the United States is discussed below.
E. Peak incidence is in June and July, with disease occurring
from March through October.
F. The disease is generally divided into 3 stages.
1. Early localized disease
a. Skin findings are most common, usually a large area of
localized erythema.
(1) 80% of patients have an acute rash.
(2) 50% of the rashes occur below the waist.
(3) The mean diameter of the rash is 10 cm.
(4) About 60% of the rashes are an area of homoge-
neous erythema.
(5) About 30% of rashes are the more classic target
lesion.
(6) About 10% of the patients have multiple lesions.
Only about 30% of patients with Lyme disease have
the classic target rash on presentation.
Table 23–5. Physical signs and culture results in patients
with disseminated gonorrhea.
Characteristic
Septic Arthritis
Triad
% Female
63%
77%
Tenosynovitis
21%
87%
Fever
32%
50%
Skin lesions
42%
90%
Positive blood cultures
0%
43%
“Tapable”joint effusion1
100%
0%
1Note that this is how the groups were distinguished.
Modified from O’Brien JP, Goldenberg DL, Rice PA. Disseminated gonococcal
infection: a prospective analysis of 49 patients and a review of pathophysiol-
ogy and immune mechanisms. Medicine (Baltimore). 1983;62:395–406.
JOINT PAIN /  371
b. Other symptoms include
(1) Myalgias and arthralgias (59%)
(2) Fever (31%)
(3) Headache (28%)
2. Early disseminated disease can involve the heart and the
CNS.
a. Atrioventricular (AV) node block is the most common
cardiac manifestation.
b. Headache is the most common CNS finding, while
meningitis and cranial nerve palsies (especially CN7)
also occur.
3. Joint symptoms predominate late in the disease.
a. Occurs in about 60% of patients months after infection.
b. Monoarticular knee arthritis is the most common.
c. Intermittent attacks or an oligoarticular arthritis may
also occur.
d. Arthritis can become chronic, even in treated patients,
in about 10% of cases.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Definitive diagnosis of Lyme disease is based on clinical char-
acteristics, exposure history, and antibody titers.
B. Antibodies may be negative early in the disease and are thus
not helpful in the setting of acute infection.
C. Antibodies are nearly 100% sensitive in the setting of arthritis.
Treatment
A. There are multiple antibiotic regimens effective in the treat-
ment of localized and disseminated Lyme disease.
B. Prophylactic treatment with a single dose of doxycycline given
after a tick bite is effective at preventing Lyme disease but is
generally not recommended given the low likelihood of being
infected with Lyme disease after a tick bite, even in endemic
areas.
C. Treatment of arthritis caused by Lyme disease is either 4 weeks
of oral antibiotics or 2–4 weeks of intravenous antibiotics. 
D. Chronic and debilitating symptoms from Lyme disease rarely
develop after appropriate treatment and, when they do occur,
the etiology of these symptoms is not clear.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
Mrs. K’s synovial fluid aspiration yielded 25 mL of translu-
cent, yellow fluid. The WBC was about 55,000/mcL with
56% PMNs. The Gram stain was negative, and crystal
exam with polarized light microscopy demonstrates nega-
tively birefringent crystals consistent with monosodium
urate crystals, thus making the diagnosis of gout.
The inflammatory joint fluid could have been predicted by the
exam. Acute gout is commonly associated with very inflamed
joints, often with very high WBC counts. The positive crystal exam
makes the diagnosis of gout. 
The patient was treated with NSAIDs and colchicine with a
good response. Because this was Mrs. K’s first attack, prophylactic
therapy was not instituted.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mrs. C is a 50-year-old woman who comes to your office
complaining of joint pain. She reports the pain has been
present for about 2 years. The pain affects her hands
and her wrists. She describes the pain as “a dull aching”
and “a stiffness.” It is worst in the morning and improves
over 2 to 3 hours. She says that on particularly bad days
she uses NSAIDs with moderate relief.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Although morning stiffness is common with most types of arthri-
tis, Mrs. C’s prolonged symptoms are suggestive of an inflamma-
tory arthritis. She does not seem to have other systemic symptoms,
and she has no history of a recent infection. Considering these piv-
otal features in this case, those of a polyarticular, inflammatory
arthritis, the differential diagnosis is broad.
RA has to lead the differential diagnosis for a middle-aged
woman with a symmetric, inflammatory arthritis. The chronicity,
age at onset, and joint distribution all support this diagnosis.
Psoriatic arthritis can be indistinguishable from RA, especially
early in its course, and needs to be considered. SLE can also pres-
ent as a chronic, inflammatory arthritis. The patient is older than
the average age of onset for SLE, and we have not heard about
other organ system involvement.
Degenerative arthropathies, such as OA and CPPD, should be
considered, but the joint distribution and inflammatory nature of
the arthritis makes these less likely. Table 23–6 lists the differential
diagnosis.
2
Mrs. C is otherwise well, except for a history of mild
hypertension managed with an angiotensin-receptor
blocker. She reports no other joint pains. She does not
have a history of psoriasis.
Her vitals signs are temperature, 37.1°C; BP, 128/84 mm
Hg; pulse, 84 bpm; RR, 14 breaths per minute. Her 
(continued)
372 /  CHAPTER 23
general physical exam is essentially normal. There is a
2/6 systolic ejection murmur. Joint exam reveals limited
range of motion of the MCPs and wrists bilaterally. There
is swelling of the third and fourth MCP on the right and
the third on the left. There is pain at the extremes of
motion and a boggy quality to the joints. A detailed skin
exam is normal. The patient is wearing nail polish on the
day of the visit.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: RA
Textbook Presentation
RA is most commonly seen in middle-aged patients with a sym-
metric polyarthritis manifesting itself with painful, stiff, and
swollen hands. Morning stiffness is often a predominant symp-
tom. Swollen and tender wrists, MCP, and proximal interpha-
langeal (PIP) joints are usually seen on exam. Laboratory evalua-
tion may reveal an anemia of chronic inflammation and a positive
rheumatoid factor (RF) and positive anti-cyclic citrullinated pep-
tide (anti-CCP).
Disease Highlights
A. RA is the paradigm for idiopathic inflammatory arthritides.
B. The sine qua non of RA is the presence of an inflammatory
synovitis, most commonly involving the hands. This synovi-
tis eventually forms a destructive pannus that injures articular
and periarticular tissue.
C. RA is fairly common, present in about 1% of the population,
so the diagnosis should be considered in any adult patient
presenting with joint symptoms and true findings of arthritis
on exam.
RA should be considered in any adult with a
chronic, symmetric polyarthritis.
D. Common findings in RA, all included in The American Col-
lege of Rheumatology (ACR) diagnostic criteria for RA are:
1. Symmetric arthritis of the hands
2. Presence of serum RF
3. Presence of radiographic changes typical of RA on hand
and wrist radiographs.
E. Morning stiffness is a classic finding.
1. Although many people are stiff upon awakening, those
with inflammatory arthritis can experience stiffness for an
hour or more.
2. Morning stiffness improves with therapy.
Prolonged morning stiffness is a good clue to an
inflammatory arthritis.
F. The joints most commonly involved are
1. Hand
a. Wrists, MCP, and PIP joints are most commonly affected.
b. Distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints are often spared.
c. Ulnar deviation of the MCPs as well as swan neck and
boutonnière deformities are classic findings.
2. Elbow
3. Knee
4. Ankle
5. Cervical spine
a. Usually presents as neck pain and stiffness.
b. C1–C2 instability can occur secondary to associated
tenosynovitis.
(1) This can produce cervical myelopathy.
(2) Advisable to radiographically image the cervical
spines of patients with RA prior to elective endo-
tracheal intubation.
G. Once RA is established, joint destruction begins to occur and
can be seen on radiographs. The chronic synovitis causes ero-
sions of bone and cartilage.
H. Long-standing RA can cause severe joint deformity through
destruction of the joint and injury to the periarticular structures.
I. Nonarticular findings in RA
1. Rheumatoid nodules, when present, are usually over exten-
sor surfaces.
Table 23–6. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. C.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Rheumatoid
Morning stiffness
Clinical diagnosis 
arthritis
Symmetric 
Rheumatoid factor
polyarthritis
Commonly involves
the MCP joints
Active Alternative
Psoriatic arthritis
Psoriasis
Clinical diagnosis
Dactylitis
Spinal arthritis
Often asymmetric
Often involves the
DIP joints
Systemic lupus
Multisystem disease
Clinical diagnosis 
erythematosus
Most common
aided by serologies
in young, African
and diagnostic
American women
criteria
Other Alternative
Osteoarthritis
Chronic arthritis
Radiograph of 
in weight-bearing
affected joints
joints
In the hands, DIP
and PIP involvement
more common than
MCP involvement
JOINT PAIN /  373
2. Dry eyes are common.
3. Pulmonary disease (eg, pulmonary nodules or interstitial
lung disease) is more common in RA than in most other
rheumatologic diseases.
4. Pericardial disease
a. Asymptomatic pericardial effusion is most common.
b. Restrictive pericarditis can occur.
5. Anemia
a. RA is the textbook cause of anemia of inflammation.
b. See Chapter 6, Anemia for a more complete discussion.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of RA can be difficult because it may resemble
other causes of inflammatory arthritis around the time of
onset.
B. Serologies 
1. RF is a nonspecific test.
a. It is occasionally positive in healthy people and in a
number of inflammatory states such as infections, sar-
coidosis, and periodontal disease.
b. The test characteristics of RF vary in different studies
but a recent meta-analysis found the following: sensi-
tivity, 69%; specificity, 85%; LR+, 4.86; LR−0.38. 
2. Anti-CCP is a newer test that is more predictive of RA
than RF. The same meta-analysis found the following: sen-
sitivity, 62%; specificity, 95%; LR+, 12.46; LR−0.36.
A positive anti-CCP is very predictive of a diagno-
sis of RA.
3. In practice, RF and anti-CCP are used together. In the
right clinical situation, patients with both tests positive are
at high risk for RA.
C. The ACR has developed diagnostic criteria for RA.
1. A patient must have 4 of the following to make a diagno-
sis. If present, any 1 of the first 4 must have been present
for at least 6 weeks.
a. Morning stiffness (lasting at least 1 hour before maxi-
mal improvement)
b. Simultaneous arthritis of more than 2 joint areas
c. Arthritis of hand joints
d. Symmetric arthritis
e. Rheumatoid nodules
f. Serum RF
g. Typical radiographic changes on hand and wrists 
2. Although meant to standardize research and not to be
used as diagnostic criteria, they are helpful in highlighting
the clinical characteristics of RA.
D. The ACR criteria can be used to help guide diagnosis.
1. The test characteristics for the criteria are shown in the
first 2 lines of Table 23–7. They demonstrate that the cri-
teria are only moderately helpful in making a diagnosis.
2. As demonstrated in the bottom 4 rows of the table, the cri-
teria can be helpful at the extremes.
3. The most specific individual criteria are rheumatoid nodules
(LR+ > 30) and consistent radiographic changes (LR+ 11).
Treatment
A. The treatment for RA has changed rapidly in recent years and
is now really the purview of the rheumatologist.
B. The treatments are often divided into those that treat the
symptoms of the disease and those that modify the course of
the disease.
C. The drugs used to treat the symptoms of the disease are:
1. NSAIDs
a. Generally used early in the course of the disease for
symptom relief while a diagnosis is being made.
b. Rarely, patients with very mild disease can remain on
these medications alone.
2. Corticosteroids 
a. Generally provide excellent symptom control
b. Their effect on slowing joint destruction from RA is
very controversial.
D. Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) include
sulfasalazine, hydroxychloroquine, methotrexate, lefluno-
mide, etanercept, and infliximab.
1. Methotrexate is the most commonly used drug in this class.
2. Patients with more severe disease also commonly receive
the TNF-α inhibitors etanercept or infliximab or lefluno-
mide, a drug that impairs T-cell function.
Table 23–7. Test characteristics for the ACR criteria for the diagnosis of RA.
No. of Criteria
Time Frame
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
≥4 (ACR criteria)
Within 1 year of symptoms
66%
82%
3.67
0.41
≥4 (ACR criteria)
After 2 years of follow-up
91%
75%
3.64
0.12
0–1
Within 1 year
91%
50%
1.82
0.18
0–1
After 2 years
98%
42%
1.69
0.05
6–7
Within 1 year
9%
100%
∞
0.91
6–7
After 2 years
37%
100%
∞
0.63
ACR,American College of Rheumatology; RA, rheumatoid arthritis.
FP
374 /  CHAPTER 23
3. New therapies include rituximab, which depletes B-
lymphocytes, and abatacept, which blocks costimula-
tion of T-lymphocytes.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
The presentation of Mrs. C’s symptoms is typical for RA. She
already fulfills 4 of the ACR criteria for RA. Further evaluation
should be directed toward gathering other information that might
suggest RA and make other diagnoses less likely.
2
A CBC with iron studies, RF, anti-CCP, and antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) are done. Radiographs are ordered with
fine details of the hands.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, RA? Have you ruled out
the active alternatives? Do other tests need to
be done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Psoriatic Arthritis
Textbook Presentation
Psoriatic arthritis most commonly presents as joint pain in
middle-aged patients with a history of psoriasis. There are signs
and symptoms of an inflammatory arthritis often involving the
wrists, MCP, PIP, and DIP joints symmetrically. Exam of the skin
reveals psoriasis and psoriatic nail changes.
Disease Highlights
A. Psoriasis is a very common skin disease that can be compli-
cated by arthritis.
B. Psoriatic arthritis is one of the seronegative spondy-
loarthropathies.
1. The ACR defines the seronegative spondyloarthropathies
as diseases characterized by inflammatory axial spine
involvement, asymmetric peripheral arthritis, enthesopa-
thy, and inflammatory eye diseases.
2. Patients with these diseases classically have a negative ANA
and RF, giving the group the “seronegative” moniker.
3. Other seronegative spondyloarthropathies are ankylosing
spondylitis, reactive arthritis, and the arthritis associated
with inflammatory bowel disease.
C. The distribution of the arthritis in psoriatic arthritis is quite
variable but follows 3 general presentations:
1. Oligoarthritis often involving large joints and the hands.
Dactylitis, a swelling of the entire finger causing a “sausage
digit” secondary to both arthritis and tenosynovitis, is a
classic finding.
2. A polyarthritis similar to RA
3. A spinal arthritis
D. Psoriatic arthritis can be indistinguishable from RA, especially
early in the course of both diseases.
1. Radiographs of the hands can show erosions.
2. About 10% of patients with psoriatic arthritis have a pos-
itive RF.
E. Distinguishing features include:
1. Common involvement of DIP joints
2. Spine involvement that is uncommon in RA
3. Arthritis mutilans, a syndrome in which there is marked
boney destruction around joints causing “telescoping
digits.”
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The most diagnostic feature of psoriatic arthritis is the pres-
ence of psoriasis.
1. Psoriasis precedes the development of arthritis in about
70% of cases.
2. Arthritis and psoriasis begin contemporaneously in about
15% of patients.
3. In about 15% of patients, there is no psoriasis at the onset
of disease, although there maybe a family history of the
skin disease.
B. A very careful skin exam should be done in all patients in
whom the diagnosis is suspected.
C. Nail findings
1. Psoriasis can cause recognizable changes in the nails (eg,
pitting, an oil stained appearance).
2. Nail changes occur in only about 20% of people with psori-
asis but in about 80% of people with psoriasis and arthritis.
3. Nail changes are especially common in people with DIP
arthritis.
A detailed skin and nail exam is important when
considering the diagnosis of psoriatic arthritis. Nail
polish should be removed for the visit.
Treatment
The treatment of psoriatic arthritis is similar to the treatment of RA.
Alternative Diagnosis: SLE
Textbook Presentation
SLE would classically present in a young woman with fatigue and
arthritis, commonly of the hands. There are often suspicious find-
ings in the history such as an episode of pleuritis or undiagnosed
anemia.
Disease Highlights
A. SLE is a truly systemic autoimmune disease primarily affect-
ing women of childbearing age.
B. Various groups are more prone to disease.
1. Female:male ratio is about 9:1.
2. There is a genetic component with about 5% of patients
reporting a first-degree relative with the disease.
3. Women of color are most commonly affected.
C. Almost every organ can be involved, although the joints, skin,
serosa, and kidneys are most commonly affected.
JOINT PAIN /  375
D. The pathogenesis of the disease is related to the formation of
autoantibodies to a number of nuclear antigens. The ANA is
the most common.
E. The most common features of SLE, both at presentation and
later in follow-up, are listed in Table 23–8.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of SLE, especially in people with mild disease,
can be difficult.
B. The ACR has developed criteria to standardize the diagnosis
for research purposes.
1. The criteria are:
a. Malar rash
b. Discoid rash
c. Photosensitivity
d. Oral ulcers
e. Arthritis (nonerosive arthritis)
f. Serositis (pleuritis or pericarditis)
g. Renal disorder (proteinuria or cellular casts)
h. Neurologic disorder (headache, seizures, or psychosis
without other cause)
i. Hematologic disorder (hemolytic anemia or any cytopenia)
j. Immunologic disorder (anti-DNA, anti-SM, or antiphos-
pholipid antibodies)
k. ANA
2. The diagnosis of SLE requires the presence of 4 or more of
these criteria.
3. Although the same reservations about using diagnostic cri-
teria clinically that were discussed above in the section of
RA apply here, the SLE criteria are frequently used.
4. The test characteristics of these criteria are given in
Table 23–9. Also included in this table are the test char-
acteristics for the various individual criteria.
5. The presence of a malar rash or satisfaction of the ACR
criteria are highly supportive of the diagnosis of SLE.
C. Autoantibodies
1. Measuring autoantibodies is very important in SLE
because they provide important diagnostic information.
2. ANA and anti-DsDNA
a. ANA is the most sensitive test for SLE. It is very
nonspecific.
b. Anti-DsDNA is highly specific. It is also associated
with the presence of lupus nephritis.
c. ANA does not vary with disease activity while anti-
DsDNA does.
d. The test characteristics of ANA and Anti-DsDNA are
given in Table 23–10.
A negative ANA essentially rules out SLE. A posi-
tive anti-DsDNA essentially rules in SLE.
e. Staining patterns are often reported with the ANA.
(1) These patterns correlate, to some extent, with the
other specific antibodies discussed below and their
use has, to a great extent, been supplanted by
these tests.
Table 23–8. Clinical manifestations of SLE at onset and
during disease.
Signs and 
Prevalence 
Prevalence at 
Symptoms
at Onset
any Time
Arthralgia 
77%
85%
Rashes
53%
78%
Constitutional
53%
77%
Renal involvement
38%
74%
Arthritis
44%
63%
Raynaud phenomenon
33%
60%
CNS involvement
24%
54%
(most commonly headache) 
GI (most commonly
18%
45%
abdominal pain)
Lymphadenopathy
16%
32%
Pleurisy
16%
30%
Pericarditis
13%
23%
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Table 23–9. Test characteristics for the ACR criteria (4 or
more criteria) and individual criteria in the diagnosis of SLE.
Finding
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
ACR criteria
80%
98%
40
0.2
Malar rash
57%
96%
14
0.45
Discoid rash
18%
99%
18
0.83
Photosensitivity
43%
96%
11
0.59
Oral ulcers
27%
96%
6.8
0.76
Arthritis
86%
37%
1.4
0.38
Serositis
56%
86%
4.0
0.51
Renal disorder
51%
94%
8.5
0.52
Hematologic disorder
20%
98%
10
0.80
Neurologic disorder
59%
89%
5.4
0.46
ACR, American College of Rheumatology; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Adapted from Black ER. Diagnostic strategies for common medical prob-
lems. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 1999:421.
376 /  CHAPTER 23
(2) In general, the meaning of the staining patterns are
as follows:
(a) Homogeneous: Seen in SLE, RA, and drug-
induced lupus
(b) Peripheral: Most specific pattern for SLE
(c) Speckled: Least specific pattern. Commonly
seen with low titer ANAs in people without
rheumatic disease
(d) Nucleolar: Common in patients with sclero-
derma and Raynaud phenomenon.
3. Other serologies are helpful because they tend to be asso-
ciated with various subsets of disease. 
a. Anti-RNP: Associated with Raynaud phenomenon
and myositis
b. Anti-SSA/Ro and anti-SSB/La: Associated with Sjögren
syndrome and photosensitivity
c. Anti-RNP: Associated with CNS manifestations of SLE
4. Table 23–11 outlines a variety of serologies that may be
obtained in persons in whom rheumatologic disease is
suspected. 
D. Complement
1. Complement levels are helpful in tracking the activity of
SLE.
2. C3, C4, and CH50 levels tend to decline during episodes
of lupus activity.
Treatment
A. Similar to RA, the treatment of SLE is complicated and to a
great extent the purview of the rheumatologist.
B. In general, NSAIDs, corticosteroids, and immunosuppres-
sants are the mainstay of therapy.
C. NSAIDs are generally used for symptomatic relief of inflam-
matory symptoms with careful monitoring because of their
potential nephrotoxic effects.
D. Corticosteroids and hydroxychloroquine are commonly used
in long-term therapy and high-dose corticosteroids are used
for disease exacerbations.
E. Cyclophosphamide, mycophenolate mofetil, and azathioprine
are the most commonly used immunosuppressants in SLE.
They are used most widely for the treatment of lupus nephritis.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mrs. C’s laboratory and radiology test results are as fol-
lows: Hgb, 10.5 g/dL; Hct, 31.0%; serum ferritin, 95 ng/mL
(nl > 45 ng/mL); serum iron, 36 mcg/dL (nl 40–
160 mcg/dL); TIBC, 200 mcg/dL (nl 230–430); RF, 253
international units/mL (nl < 10 international units/mL);
anti-CCP 1000 units/mL (nl < 100 units/mL) ANA, 2560
titer (nl < 80); anti- DsDNA, < 10 titer (nl < 10); radi-
ographs of hand, periarticular erosions of the 3 clinically
involved MCP joints.
The diagnosis of RA is now fairly certain. The clinical picture,
as well as the laboratory test showing an anemia of chronic
inflammation, elevated RF and anti-CCP, and positive ANA all
support the diagnosis. (About 40% of patients with RA have
positive ANAs.) The first step in management is to control Mrs.
C’s symptoms. NSAIDs and prednisone are likely to accomplish
this. There are already signs of joint destruction on the radi-
ographs, so aggressive therapy with disease-modifying drugs is
indicated.
Table 23–10. Test characteristics for ANA and DsDNA in
the diagnosis of SLE.
Test
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
ANA
99%
80%
4.95
0.01
DsDNA
73%
98%
36.5
0.28
ANA, antinuclear antibodies; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Adapted from Black ER. Diagnostic strategies for common medical prob-
lems. Philadelphia: American College of Physicians, 1999:423.
Table 23–11. Common serologies in rheumatologic
diseases.
Antibody
Clinical Association
Anti-DsDNA
Nephritis in SLE
Anti–Smith 
SLE
Anti-RNP
Raynaud phenomenon and
myositis in SLE
Anti Ribosomal P
CNS disease in SLE
Anti SSA/Ro,
Sjögren syndrome and skin disease
Anti SSB/La
in SLE and Sjögren syndrome
Anti-histone antibodies
Drug-induced lupus
Anti-jo-1
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Anti-DNA topoisomerase
Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma)
I (Scl-70), anti-RNA
polymerase I and III
ANCA
Many vasculitic diseases including
Wegener granulomatosis, microscopic
polyangiitis, and Churg-Strauss
syndrome
Anti-U1 RNP
Mixed connective tissue disease
antibodies
Anti-GBM
Anti-GBM antibody
(Goodpasture disease)
JOINT PAIN /  377
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Ms. T is a 21-year-old woman who comes to see you com-
plaining of rash and joint pain for the past 2 days. She
reports being well until 2 days ago when she awoke with
severe pain in both knees and mild pain in both wrists. No
other joints were involved. She also noted a nonpruritic
rash on her distal arms and legs. She describes the rash
as “splotchy.” The joint pain has worsened over the last 2 days,
and she reports that both her knees are swollen.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Ms. T has acute onset polyarticular joint symptoms. From her his-
tory of knee swelling, it is likely that she has arthritis rather than
arthralgias. The pivotal points of acute onset and polyarticular
involvement combined with the patient’s demographics and asso-
ciated symptoms help narrow the differential diagnosis.
In a young woman with arthritis and a rash, SLE needs to be
considered. As discussed above, rash, arthralgias, and arthritis are
among the most common presenting symptoms in patients with
SLE. The acuity of the onset and lack of other organ system
involvement would be a little unusual for patients with SLE. RA
would be less likely given the patient’s age; however, Still disease,
a variant of RA, may present acutely in young patients.
Various infectious arthritides need to be considered. Many viral
illnesses can cause arthritis. Parvovirus is probably the most com-
mon. Bacterial illnesses can cause polyarthritis in many different
ways. Septic arthritides, discussed above, can be polyarticular as
can disseminated gonorrhea. Bacterial endocarditis can cause asep-
tic polyarthritis and often causes arthralgia of multiple joints.
Acute rheumatic fever classically causes a migratory polyarthritis
and rash. Lyme disease, discussed above, is most commonly
monoarticular. Reactive arthritis, occurring after enteric or uro-
genital infections, is also a possibility.
Given that the viral arthritides are more common than bacter-
ial ones and, as far as we know, the patient has been previously
well, viral arthritis is probably more likely than bacterial disease.
Table 23–12 lists the differential diagnosis.
3
On further history, Ms. T reports that 10 days before she
came to see you she experienced 2 days of fatigue, myal-
gias, and fever to 39.4°C. There were no other symptoms.
These symptoms resolved uneventfully.
She reports no travel outside Chicago, where she is in
school, for the last year. She does not use recreational
drugs. She is not sexually active.
On physical exam, she appears healthy. Her vital signs
are temperature, 36.9°C; BP, 106/68 mm Hg; pulse,
84 bpm; RR, 14 breaths per minute. On extremity exam,
her wrists have normal range of motion. There is pain with
extremes of flexion and extension in the wrists and MCPs.
There is mildly decreased range of motion and warmth in
the knees as well as small effusions.
Skin exam reveals a diffuse erythematous rash with
macules on the hands, feet, and distal extremities. Palms
and soles are spared. The remainder of the exam was nor-
mal. There is no heart murmur.
The patient’s history forces us to reorder our differential. The
history of a recent febrile illness has to make a viral arthritis or
postinfectious arthritis most likely. Lyme disease and bacterial
endocarditis are very unlikely given her lack of suspicious exposure
and the fact that she is presently well. SLE remains on the differ-
ential but is less likely.
In a patient with acute polyarthritis, a detailed his-
tory of recent illnesses must be taken.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Table 23–12. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms.T.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Systemic lupus
Multisystem disease
Clinical diagnosis 
erythematosus
Most common in 
aided by serologies 
young, African
and diagnostic 
American women
criteria
Active Alternative
Viral arthritis,
Usually a history 
Antibody titers and
parvovirus most
of preceding
serology
common
illness
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Rheumatic fever
Migratory polyarthritis
Jones criteria
Carditis
Erythema marginatum 
Bacterial 
Fever with 
Positive synovial 
arthritis
monoarticular or 
(or other body) 
(gonococcal or
polyarticular arthritis
fluid cultures
nongonococcal)
Other Alternative
Reactive
History of recent 
Clinical diagnosis
arthritis
colonic or urogenital
infection
Presence of arthritis,
urethritis, and iritis
378 /  CHAPTER 23
Leading Hypothesis: Parvovirus
Textbook Presentation
Parvovirus is commonly seen in young people who are in contact
with children (mothers, teachers, daycare workers, and pediatri-
cians). Parvovirus often presents 10 days after a flu-like illness with
a macular rash and moderately severe arthralgias of the joints of
the upper extremities. There is no fever and symptoms improve
over the course of weeks.
Disease Highlights
A. There are 5 major manifestations of the parvovirus infection
in humans.
1. Erythema infectiosum (fifth disease) in children
2. Acute arthropathy in adults
3. Transient aplastic crises in patients with chronic hemolytic
diseases
4. Chronic anemia in immunocompromised persons
5. Fetal death complicating maternal infection prior to 20
weeks gestation.
B. In adults, the acute disease often proceeds in 2 phases with the
arthritis following a systemic febrile infection.
1. Initial phase
a. Nonspecific symptoms such as fever, malaise, headache,
myalgia, diarrhea, and pruritus
b. Generally resembles a nonspecific viral infection
2. Second phase
a. Follows initial phase by 10 days with joint symptoms
and rash dominating the clinical picture.
b. Arthropathy accompanies about 50% of adult
infections.
c. The arthritis is a symmetric polyarthritis commonly
involving the following joints:
(1) Elbows
(2) Wrists
(3) Hands
(4) Knees
(5) Ankles
(6) Feet
d. The rash lasts 2–3 days.
(1) It is usually a peripheral macular rash that occa-
sionally spreads to the trunk.
(2) Many different rashes have been described.
C. The incidence of parvovirus infection peaks between January
and June.
D. Attack rates of 50–60%.
E. Contact with children is common among patients.
F. Other viruses cause arthritis less commonly. These are listed in
Table 23–13.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of parvovirus can be difficult because it can
mimic other diseases.
B. Distinguishing the disease from SLE can be challenging.
1. Both may present with arthritis, arthralgias, and rash.
2. Both are more common in women than men.
3. ANA can be transiently elevated in patients with
parvovirus.
C. Diagnosis is made by identifying IgM to parvovirus in the
serum of patients with a suspicious symptom complex.
Treatment
A. The treatment of parvovirus is symptomatic.
B. NSAIDs generally provide good relief of symptoms.
C. Symptoms usually resolve within a couple of weeks, but as
many as 10% of patients have symptoms that last longer.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
Ms. T was treated with NSAIDs and given a return
appointment in 1 week. Laboratory tests were sent and
revealed the following: Chem-7, normal; liver function tests,
normal; WBC, 6800/mcL; Hgb, 12.9 g/dL; Hct, 37.9%;
platelet, 182,000/mcL; ESR, 68 mm/h; rapid strep test,
negative. ANA, streptococcal antibody titers, blood cul-
tures, stool cultures, and parvovirus titer were pending at
the time of discharge from her first appointment.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, parvovirus? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
Parvovirus, or another viral arthritis, is high on the differential.
Laboratory testing to rule in the most likely disease and rule out
other possible diseases is reasonable. The normal liver function
tests rule out hepatitis B as the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
Negative blood cultures will make endocarditis even less likely
than it is based on the history alone. Lyme disease was thought so
unlikely that serologies were not even sent. Stool cultures were
sent to evaluate the possibility of a reactive arthritis.
Table 23–13. Common viral causes of arthritis.
Virus
Disease Characteristics
Rubella
Seen in about 50% of infections
Occurs occasionally with vaccination
Associated with rash
Hepatitis B
Arthritis usually precedes jaundice
but is associated with transaminitis
Rash may be present
HIV
May be symptom of seroconversion
or occur at other times during illness
Mumps, arboviruses, adenoviruses, coxsackieviruses, and echoviruses
all associated with arthritis
JOINT PAIN /  379
Alternative Diagnosis: Reactive Arthritis
Textbook Presentation
Reactive arthritis classically presents as a subacute arthritis, often
involving the knees, ankles, and back. Physical exam reveals arthri-
tis. There may be a history of an antecedent infection and symp-
toms of urethritis and conjunctivitis.
Disease Highlights
A. Reactive arthritis is an acute arthritis complicating enteric and
urogenital infections. This was formerly called Reiter syn-
drome.
B. Reactive arthritis is often accompanied by other extra-articular
manifestations such as urethritis or conjunctivitis.
C. Reactive arthritis is 1 of the seronegative spondyloarthropathies.
D. The bacteria implicated in reactive arthritis are:
1. Shigella
2. Salmonella
3. Yersinia
4. Campylobacter
5. Chlamydia
E. GI infections are equally likely to be the inciting event in men
and women. Arthritis complicating chlamydial infection is
rare in women.
F. The mean age at diagnosis is 26 years.
G. More often than not, the inciting infection is asymptomatic.
Reactive arthritis often presents without an appar-
ent antecedent infection.
H. Manifestations of the disease begin 2–4 weeks after the incit-
ing infection.
1. Urethritis is frequently the first finding followed by eye
findings and then arthritis.
2. The asymmetric arthritis has a predilection for the lower
extremities.
a. Knees, ankles, and joints in the feet are the most com-
mon locations.
b. Dactylitis, heel pain, and back pain also occur in
50–60% of patients.
3. Other associated findings include rash, nail changes, and
oral ulcers.
4. Table 23–14 shows the prevalence of various findings.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis is a clinical one.
B. A high clinical suspicion is warranted in a young patient with
an asymmetric oligoarthritis.
Treatment
A. In most patients, symptoms resolve within 1 year.
B. NSAIDs are useful in treating the acute symptoms.
C. Culture positive enteric or chlamydial infections should be
treated.
D. A subset of patients experience relapse, development of a
chronic arthritis, or development of ankylosing spondylitis.
Alternative Diagnosis: Rheumatic Fever
Textbook Presentation
Rheumatic fever classically presents in a child in the weeks fol-
lowing streptococcal pharyngitis. The 5 cardinal manifestations
are arthritis, carditis, rash, subcutaneous nodules, and chorea. The
arthritis is typically migratory, involving the knees, ankles, and
hands.
Disease Highlights
A. Rheumatic fever is an inflammatory disease that follows strep-
tococcal pharyngitis by 2–4 weeks.
B. Unlike in children, clinical documentation of a previous
streptococcal infection is rare in adults and the most pro-
nounced symptoms are joint pain and stiffness.
C. The arthritis is generally described as a migratory polyarthritis.
1. Individual joints are usually affected for less than a week.
2. The joints in the legs are usually affected first.
3. Subjective complaints are often more prominent than
objective findings.
D. Carditis
1. May involve any, or all, parts of the heart—pericarditis,
myocarditis, endocarditis, or pancarditis.
2. Endocarditis commonly causes valvular lesions that may
progress over years to symptomatic valve disease, especially
mitral stenosis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of rheumatic fever is based on the Jones Criteria.
B. The criteria require evidence of an antecedent group A strep-
tococcal infection (culture, antibody titer) with either 2 major
criteria or 1 major and 2 minor criteria given in Table 23–15.
Table 23–14. Features of reactive arthritis.
Feature
Prevalence
History of diarrhea
6%
Urethritis
46%
Conjunctivitis
31%
Location of arthritis
Knees
68%
Ankles
49%
Feet
64%
Fever > 38.3 °C
32%
HLA-B27
81%
From Arnett FC. Incomplete Reiter’s syndrome: Clinical comparisons with
classical triad. Ann Rheum Dis 1979;38(Suppl 1):suppl 73–78. Adapted and
reproduced with permission from the BMJ Publishing Group.
380 /  CHAPTER 23
Treatment
A. Anti-inflammatories
1. Aspirin is the mainstay of therapy.
2. Corticosteroids are given to patients with severe carditis.
B. Antibiotics
1. Penicillin for treatment of pharyngitis.
2. Lifelong prophylactic therapy with penicillin is usually
recommended after the initial therapy.
CASE RESOLUTION
Parvovirus clearly fits this patient’s presentation. Reactive arthritis is
possible although the patient’s recent illness was not GI. Rheumatic
fever seems less likely. Although she does have multiple Jones crite-
ria (polyarthritis, arthralgia, elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate
[ESR]) and although the lack of a sore throat during the recent ill-
ness is not terribly helpful, the patient does not have a migratory
arthritis or evidence of present streptococcal carriage.
3
Ms. T’s blood work came back negative except for a posi-
tive ANA (titer 1:80) and a positive parvovirus IgM. She
was treated with NSAIDs with good relief of her symp-
toms. Her rash resolved over 3–4 days, and joint pain
was gone at a follow-up visit 2 weeks later.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
4
Mr. L is a 55-year-old man who comes to see you com-
plaining of right hip pain. He reports suffering with the
pain for about 2 years. The pain is worst in the morning
and evening. In the morning, it is associated with stiff-
ness of his hip. The stiffness lasts about 5 minutes and
then improves. At the end of the day he routinely feels a
dull ache that is worse if he has had a very active day. He
recently noticed that he is unable to cross his legs (right
over left) without significant discomfort.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. L is a middle-aged man with chronic, monoarticular symp-
toms. The time course, single joint involvement and noninflam-
matory nature of the process (we have not heard about warmth,
erythema, or prolonged morning stiffness) are the pivotal points in
this case.
Reviewing the initial differential diagnosis, the articular process
that best fits the history is OA, a chronic, noninflammatory, often
monoarticular, arthritis. OA is so common in older adults that it
becomes the diagnosis to disprove in all patients who have pain
consistent with OA. The disease most commonly affects the
fingers, knee, hip, and spine. CPPD is another chronic degenera-
tive arthritis that could produce similar symptoms and should be
considered.
In patients with noninflammatory monoarticular symptoms,
consider the specific periarticular symptoms that can affect the
particular joint.
When considering the periarticular syndromes that cause hip
pain, it is important to identify where exactly the patient feels the
pain. Lumbar spine disease with radicular symptoms can cause pain
in the buttocks or lateral hip. Trochanteric bursitis is a common
cause of lateral hip pain. Inguinal hernias may cause groin pain.
Femoral stress fractures may cause groin or lateral hip pain.
Although such stress fractures are rare and are most commonly
seen in young women, they should not be missed. Table 23–16
lists the differential diagnosis.
“Hip pain” is a nonspecific complaint. It is impor-
tant to identify the exact location of the pain.
4
When asked to pinpoint the location of his pain, Mr. L
reports that he primarily feels it in the groin. Rest, acet-
aminophen, and heat all seem to help the pain. He comes
in today because he is in more constant pain, and he has
begun to limp on bad days. His past history is remarkable
only for mild asthma. He denies any previous injury to the
hip. He has never been hospitalized or taken corticos-
teroids. His only medication is albuterol.
Vital signs are temperature, 37.0°C; RR, 12 breaths
per minute; BP, 132/70 mm Hg; pulse, 72 bpm. On physical 
Table 23–15. Jones criteria for the rheumatic fever.
Major Criteria
Minor Criteria
Polyarthritis
Fever 
Carditis (pericarditis,
Arthralgia
myocarditis, endocarditis) 
Chorea
Inflammatory markers (eg, CRP, ESR)
Rash—Erythema
PR segment prolongation
marginatum
Subcutaneous nodules
CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
JOINT PAIN /  381
exam, there is no warmth, erythema, or tenderness
around the hip or over the trochanteric bursa. Testicular
exam and hernia exam are normal. Flexion and extension
of the right hip are nearly normal. There is decreased
range of motion in hip rotation with about 10 degrees in
internal rotation and 20 degrees in external rotation.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: OA
Textbook Presentation
OA most commonly presents in older patients as chronic joint
pain and stiffness. Pain is usually worse with activity and improves
with rest. Knees, hips, and hands are most commonly affected. On
exam of joints, there is bony enlargement without significant effu-
sions but with mild tenderness along the joint lines and limited
range of motion. Radiographs are diagnostic.
Disease Highlights
A. OA is a disease of aging, with peak prevalence in the eighth
decade. However, as obesity is risk factor, it may be seen in
much younger people with severe obesity.
B. More common in women than men.
C. Although often referred to as “wear and tear” arthritis, the
pathophysiology is actually quite complicated.
D. Joint destruction manifests as loss of cartilage with change to
the underlying bone manifesting as bony sclerosis and osteo-
phyte formation.
E. Joint distribution
1. OA is most common in the knees, hips, hands, and spine.
2. Nearly any joint can be affected.
3. Non–weight-bearing joints other than the hand, such as
the elbow, wrist, and shoulder, are rarely affected by pri-
mary OA. The ankle is also not a common location.
F. Classic symptoms include
1. Pain with activity
2. Relief with rest
3. Periarticular tenderness
4. Occasional mildly inflammatory flares
5. Gelling: Joint stiffness brought on by rest and rapidly
resolving with activity.
6. Late in the disease, constant pain with joint deformation
and severe disability is common.
G. Physical exam findings
1. Generally there is bony enlargement, crepitus, and decreased
range of motion without signs of inflammation or synovial
thickening.
2. Knee
a. Crepitus
b. Tenderness on joint line
c. Varus or valgus displacement of the lower leg related to
asymmetric loss of the articular cartilage.
3. Hip
a. Marked decrease first in internal and then external rotation
b. Groin pain with rotation of the hip
4. Hand
a. Tenderness and bony enlargement of the first car-
pometacarpal joint
b. Joint involvement in decreasing order of prevalence is
DIP, PIP, MCP.
c. Heberden nodes (prominent osteophytes of the DIP
joints)
d. Bouchard nodes (prominent osteophytes of the PIP joints)
5. Spine
a. Signs of spinal OA vary depending on location.
b. Pain and limited range of motion are common.
c. Radicular symptoms resulting from osteophyte
impingement on nerve roots is seen.
d. Spinal stenosis with associated symptoms (radiculopathy
and pseudoclaudication) can result from bony hypertrophy.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of OA is clinical, based on a combination of
compatible history, physical exam, and radiologic findings.
B. Because of the high prevalence of OA, the diagnosis should
lead the differential in any patient with suspicious symptoms.
Table 23–16. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. L.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Osteoarthritis
Chronic pain in
Radiograph of 
weight-bearing
affected joints
joints
Active Alternative
CPPD
May present as
Demonstration of 
chronic or acute
crystals in synovial 
arthritis
fluid or classic
radiographic
findings
Active Alternatives—Nonarticular
Inguinal hernia
Pain worse with
Physical exam
straining
Trochanteric
Lateral hip pain
Physical exam
bursitis
Tenderness over 
Response to 
the bursa
injection therapy
Lumbar nerve
Positive straight
Physical exam
root compression
leg raise
MRI
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Femoral stress
Most common in 
MRI
fractures
young women
Bone scan
involved in weight-
bearing exercise
382 /  CHAPTER 23
C. Diagnostic criteria have been established.
1. Hand
a. Pain, aching, or stiffness
b. 3 of the following
(1) Hard tissue enlargement of at least 2 of the fol-
lowing joints:
(a) Second and third DIP joints
(b) Second and third PIP joints
(c) First MCP joint
(2) Hard tissue enlargement of 2 or more DIP joints
(3) Fewer than 3 swollen MCP joints
(4) Deformity of at least 1 of the joints listed in above
entries a through c.
2. Hip
a. Hip pain
b. 2 of the following:
(1) ESR < 20 mm/h
(2) Osteophytes on radiograph 
(3) Joint space narrowing on radiograph
3. Knee: There are multiple criteria, the easiest to remember is
a. Knee pain
b. Osteophytes on radiograph, and
c. 1 of the following
(1) Age older than 50 years
(2) Stiffness < 30 minutes
(3) Crepitus
D. The test characteristics for these criteria are shown in Table 23–17.
Treatment
A. Nonpharmacologic
1. Patient education and improved social support have been
shown to improve pain and improve the efficacy of phar-
macologic interventions.
2. Weight loss is key in decreasing symptoms of lower
extremity OA.
3. Physical and occupational therapy can help patients with
functional impairment due to OA.
B. Pharmacologic
1. Acetaminophen
a. Standard initial therapy given its effectiveness and low
side-effect profile.
b. Equally effective to NSAIDs for mild to moderate OA.
2. NSAIDS are probably more effective than acetaminophen
for severe OA.
3. Oral combinations of glucosamine and chondroitan sul-
fate probably are modestly effective in some patients and
have a very favorable side-effect profile.
4. Intra-articular medications
a. Intra-articular corticosteroids are very effective for
acute flares of OA. 
b. Hyaluronic acid given by intra-articular injection may
provide a small benefit to some patients.
5. Tramadol and opioid analgesics are reasonable choices for
patients with severe symptoms.
C. Surgical
1. Arthroscopic surgery for OA is probably ineffective.
2. Hip and knee replacement can have remarkable effects on
decreasing pain and improving function in patients in
whom conservative therapy has failed.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Mr. L’s history and physical exam are very suggestive of OA, but
CPPD remains a possibility. Most of the periarticular syndromes
that were considered initially have been made unlikely by the
exam. Lumbar spine disease with radicular symptoms would not
cause the limited range of motion that is seen on the patient’s
exam. Patients with trochanteric bursitis usually have more acute
symptoms than did this patient, and there is tenderness over the
bursa. Mr. L does not have a hernia on exam. Femoral stress frac-
tures may cause groin pain but should not really cause limited
range of motion. That said, this is a diagnosis that must not be
missed, so further consideration should be given.
4
The working diagnosis of OA was made and the patient
was given 1000 mg of acetaminophen twice daily. A radi-
ograph was ordered.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, OA? Have you ruled out
the active alternatives? Do other tests need to
be done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis:
Femoral Stress Fractures
Textbook Presentation
Femoral stress fractures are most commonly seen in young female
athletes. Symptoms begin acutely with persistent groin pain that
worsens as the day progresses. On physical exam, there is often
mild tenderness over the proximal one-third of the femur. Range
of motion of the hip is normal. Radiographs are usually normal.
Disease Highlights
A. Like other types of stress fractures, femoral stress fractures are
most common
1. In athletes who have recently increased their level of training
Table 23–17. Test characteristics for the diagnosis of OA.
Joint
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Hand 
94%
87%
7.2
0.07
Hip 
89%
91%
9.9
0.12
Knee
91%
86%
6.5
0.1
OA, osteoarthritis.
JOINT PAIN /  383
Table 23–18. Some common periarticular pain syndromes.
Area of Pain 
Diagnosis
History
Physical and Diagnostic Evaluation
Neck and shoulder
Acute cervical sprain
Pain and stiffness over neck and
Pain with tilting head
upper thoracic vertebrae
Muscle spasm often palpable
Often first noticed when rising
in the morning 
Cervical radiculopathy
Pain and stiffness of cervical
Radicular symptoms can be reproduced
spine, usually with radiation to
with manipulation of cervical spine
upper back and arm
MRI diagnostic
Occasionally manifests solely as
pain between spine and scapula
Rotator cuff/
Pain inferior to 
Tenderness inferior to acromioclavicular joint
Impingement
acromioclavicular joint 
Pain with passively raising shoulder 
syndrome
while preventing “shrugging”
Rotator cuff tear
Pain similar to above
Weakness in abduction
Occurs after injury in
Positive Job test (patient resists downward 
younger patients
force to an internally rotated, anteriorly 
Often spontaneous in
stretched arm)
older patients
Elbow
Lateral and medial
Pain over tendon insertion on 
Tenderness at site of pain
epicondylitis
medial and lateral epicondyle 
Exacerbated with wrist flexion (medial)
or extension (lateral)
Olecranon bursitis
Pain over olecranon bursa
Tenderness and swelling over the olecranon bursa 
Hand
DeQuervain
Pain at the lateral base of 
Worse with pincer grasp
tenosynovitis
the thumb 
Positive Finkelstein maneuver (ulnar deviation
of wrist with fingers curled over thumb)
Hip
Trochanteric bursitis
Pain over bursa
Tenderness over bursa
Patient often notes pain
Sometimes visualized on radiograph 
when lying on area at night
Meralgia paresthetica
Pain or numbness over
Neuropathic-type pain
lateral thigh
Abnormal sensation over lateral femoral 
Often after weight gain or loss
cutaneous nerve distribution
Knee
Patellofemoral
Anterior knee pain, often
Crepitus beneath patella
syndrome
worse climbing or 
descending stairs
Meniscal and
Ligament injuries tend
Ligament injuries will manifest as laxity on exam
ligamentous injuries
to be traumatic
Meniscal injuries as a click
Classically associated with
MRI is diagnostic
the knee giving way
Meniscal injuries may
be traumatic or degenerative
Knee locking is classic
Foot and ankle
Achilles tendinitis
Pain over distal tendon
Tenderness over insertion of tendon
Pain and stiffness worse
after inactivity 
Plantar fasciitis
Pain anterior to heel
History usually diagnostic
Worse with first standing
Radiograph may show heel spur
Morton neuroma
Pain between the second
Tenderness at the area of pain
and third or third and fourth
metatarsal heads
Polyperiarticular
Fibromyalgia
Diffuse pain syndrome
Diagnosis depends on tenderness at 11
Often nonrestorative sleep
or more specific locations
Polymyalgia
Pain and disability of large
Disease is often associated with signs of 
rheumatica
muscles of shoulder and hips
inflammatory disease (anemia, elevated
CRP and ESR) 
CRP, C-reactive protein; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
384 /  CHAPTER 23
2. In women
3. In persons with decreased bone density
B. The most common stress fractures are tibial and metatarsal.
C. Femoral stress fractures usually present with hip or groin pain
with preserved range of motion of the hip.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Stress fractures in general and femoral stress fractures in par-
ticular are often not apparent on initial radiographs.
B. MRI and bone scans are considered the diagnostic test of
choice.
Treatment
A. Many stress fractures heal with reduced physical activity and
short-term immobilization.
B. Femoral stress fractures may resolve with decreased weight
bearing (crutches) or may require casting or internal fixation.
CASE RESOLUTION
4
The patient’s hip radiograph showed changes consistent
with OA.
The combination of a high clinical suspicion, pain, and consistent
findings on a radiograph confirms the diagnosis.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Periarticular Syndromes
There are textbooks written about the numerous periarticular syn-
dromes that commonly present to primary care physicians, ortho-
pedists, and rheumatologists. Table 23–18 briefly outlines some of
the most common.
REFERENCES
Arnett FC. Incomplete Reiter's syndrome: clinical comparisons with classical triad.
Ann Rheum Dis. 1979;38 Suppl 1:suppl 73–8. 
Black ER. Diagnostic strategies for common medical problems. 2nd ed. Philadelphia:
American College of Physicians; 1999.
Margaretten ME, Kohlwes J, Moore D, Bent S. Does this adult patient have sep-
tic arthritis? JAMA. 2007;297(13):1478–88.
Nishimura K, Sugiyama D, Kogata Y et al. Meta-analysis: diagnostic accuracy of
anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody and rheumatoid factor for rheuma-
toid arthritis. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146(11):797–808.
O’Brien JP, Goldenberg DL, Rice PA. Disseminated gonococcal infection: a
prospective analysis of 49 patients and a review of pathophysiology and
immune mechanisms. Medicine (Baltimore). 1983;62(6):395–406.
Primer on the rheumatic diseases. 12th ed. Atlanta, GA: Arthritis Foundation; 2001.
Shmerling RH. Origin and utility of measurement of rheumatoid factors. In: Rose
B, ed. UpToDate, 2007.
Steere AC. Lyme disease. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(2):115–25. 
Terkeltaub RA. Clinical practice. Gout. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(17):1647–55.
JOINT PAIN /  385
Are the
symptoms
of joint pain
monoarticular or
polyarticular?
Diagnostic Approach: Joint Pain
Is the pain
articular or
periarticular?
Consider joint
specific
periarticular
syndromes
Is the
history and
physical consistent
with an
inflammatory
process?
Consider OA,
CPPDD
Are there at
least 6 findings
highly consistent
with gout?
Treat for gout
Aspirate joint to
diagnosis crystal
or infectious
disease
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide; CPPDD, calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease; OA, osteoarthritis;
SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Are the symptoms
acute or chronic?
Consider
infectious or
postinfectious
causes
Consider
rheumatologic
diseases
If nodules or anti-
CCP antibody
present, RA likely
If anti-Ds DNA 
present, SLE is
likely
Is the history
and physical
consistent with an
inflammatory
process?
Consider OA of
CPPDD
Polyarticular
Monoarticular
Periarticular
Acute
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Articular
Chronic
No
?
24
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Ms. N is a 23-year-old woman who comes to see you com-
plaining of a rash.
What is the differential diagnosis of a rash?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
In clinical practice, rashes are diagnosed through pattern recogni-
tion probably more than with any other complaint. This is an effec-
tive way of making a diagnosis when the diagnosis is obvious or
when the observer is very experienced. The risk with pattern recog-
nition is that diagnostic hypotheses are heavily influenced by recent
experience, rare diagnoses tend not to be considered, and physi-
cians often reach premature closure on an incorrect diagnosis.
The most useful way of organizing the differential diagnosis of a
rash is to base it on the morphology of the lesion. To correctly cat-
egorize a lesion’s morphology, the physician must first identify the
primary lesion, the typical element of the eruption. Once the pri-
mary lesion is identified, the eruption can be categorized based on
morphology and then the specific diagnosis identified. This process
can be difficult. The primary lesion is often affected by secondary
changes such as excoriation, erosion, crusting, and even coalescence.
The differential diagnosis of one lesion can also be extensive. After
determining the morphology of the primary lesion, the next step in
making the diagnosis is often to observe the distribution of lesion.
Some eruptions will have characteristic distributions. What follows
are some important definitions, followed by a differential diagnosis
of some of the most common primary lesions.
1. Macule: lesion without elevation or depression, < 1 cm
2. Patch: lesion without elevation or depression, > 1 cm
3. Papule: any solid, elevated “bump” < 1 cm
4. Plaque: raised plateau-like lesion of variable size, no depth,
often a confluence of papules
5. Nodule: solid lesion with palpable elevation, 1–5 cm
6. Tumor: solid growth, > 5 cm
7. Cyst: encapsulated lesion, filled with soft material
8. Vesicle: elevated, fluid-filled blister, < 1 cm
9. Bulla: elevated, fluid-filled blister, > 1 cm
10. Pustule: elevated, pus-filled blister, any size
11. Wheal: inflamed papule or plaque formed by transient and
superficial local edema
12. Comedone: a plug of keratinous material and skin oils retained
in a follicle; open is black, closed is white
Papulosquamous eruptions present with papules and plaques
associated with superficial scaling. Folliculopapular eruptions begin
as papules arising in a perifollicular distribution. Dermal reaction
patterns result from infiltrative and inflammatory processes involv-
ing the dermal and subcutaneous tissues. Petechia and purpura
occur when there is leakage of blood products into surrounding tis-
sues from inflamed or damaged blood vessels. Blistering disorders
present with vesicles and bullae.
A. Papulosquamous eruptions (papules and plaques)
1. Eczematous dermatitis
a. Atopic dermatitis
b. Allergic contact dermatitis
c. Irritant contact dermatitis
2. Pityriasis rosea
3. Tinea infections
4. Psoriasis
5. Seborrheic dermatitis
B. Folliculopapular eruptions (perifollicular papules)
1. Acne vulgaris
2. Rosacea
3. Folliculitis
4. Perioral dermatitis
C. Dermal reaction patterns
1. Urticaria
2. Sarcoidosis
3. Granuloma annulare
4. Erythema nodosum
D. Purpura and petechiae
1. Palpable purpura
a. Leukocytoclastic vasculitis
(1) Henoch-Schönlein purpura
(2) Allergic vasculitis
b. Infectious
(1) Bacteremia
(2) Rocky Mountain spotted fever
2. Nonpalpable purpura
a. Thrombocytopenia
b. Medication related
I have a patient with a rash.
How do I determine the cause?
386
RASH /  387
c. Benign pigmented purpura
d. Bacteremia
e. Disseminated intravascular coagulation
f. Actinic/senile purpura
g. Corticosteroid associated
h. Amyloidosis
E. Blistering disorders (vesicles, pustules, and bullae)
1. Autoimmune
a. Bullous pemphigoid
b. Pemphigus vulgaris
c. Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita
2. Congenital
a. Epidermolysis bullosa
b. Epidermolytic hyperkeratosis
3. Infectious
a. Varicella zoster
b. Herpes simplex
c. Impetigo
d. Staphylococcal scalded skin
4. Hypersensitivity syndromes
a. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
b. Toxic epidermal necrolysis
1
Ms. N complains of frequent “breakouts” on her face for
the last several years. She reports the use of many top-
ical over-the-counter agents over the years. She com-
plains of feeling greasy and the need to “squeeze pus”
out of lesions on a regular basis.
On examination, over the forehead, cheeks, and chin
there are many erythematous papules, occasional pus-
tules, and open and closed comedones. There is a predom-
inance of larger nodules along the jaw line. Similar erythe-
matous papules involve the upper back and chest. There is
neither significant background erythema nor scaling in the
scalp, eyebrows, or nasolabial folds. Figure 24–1 shows her
on her initial visit.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The pivotal clues in this case are the morphology of the lesion and
its distribution. This patient has a folliculopapular eruption that
predominantly affects the face, chest, and upper back. Primary
lesions of inflammatory papules, pustules, and comedones place
acne at the top of the differential. The history is typical for acne:
a chronic course with intermittent flares.
Other folliculopapular conditions must be considered. The
lack of background erythema and telangiectasias makes a diagno-
sis of rosacea less likely. Perioral dermatitis typically presents as
monomorphic small papules. It is closely associated with the use
of topical corticosteroids and cosmetics. Treatment usually
requires cessation of these agents and the administration of antibi-
otics with cutaneous antiinflammatory activity. The mixture of
lesion type, with comedones as well as papules and nodules, and
the more diffuse distribution makes acne more likely than perio-
ral dermatitis. An infectious folliculitis is possible, but the course
of the disease makes this extremely unlikely (Table 24–1).
Figure 24–1. Ms. N on initial presentation. (See Plate 1.)
Table 24–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. N.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues 
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Acne vulgaris
Presence of
Clinical diagnosis
comedones, papules,
pustules, nodules
Flares with menses
Distribution over the
face, chest and back
Active Alternative
Rosacea
History of flushing
Clinical diagnosis
Presence of
telangiectasias and
possibly inflammatory
papules
Other Alternative
Perioral
Monomorphic 
Clinical diagnosis
dermatitis
eruption of fine
erythematous
papules clustered
around mouth
1
The patient is in good health and is not overweight. She
is not taking any oral medications. She reports regular
menstrual cycles and notes that the breakouts are
worse around the time of her period. She does not report
easy flushing or any increased hair growth on the face or
chest. She has one healthy child.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Acne Vulgaris
Textbook Presentation
Typically, acne vulgaris presents in adolescence with chronic, wax-
ing and waning lesions. A variety of lesions are present, including
inflammatory papules, pustules, comedones, and nodulocysts over
the face, chest, and back.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: inflammatory papules, pustules, come-
dones, and nodulocysts over the face, chest, and back. (See
Figure 24–1.)
B. Acne is a highly prevalent condition, most common during
mid-to-late adolescence.
C. Acne may persist beyond adolescence, especially in women.
D. Acne is caused by the obstruction of sebaceous follicles on the
face and trunk. Three factors are involved in the development
of the lesions:
1. Increased sebum production (androgen dependent)
obstructs follicles.
2. Excessive desquamation of epithelial cells and keratin into
follicles causes obstruction.
3. Inflammation secondary to proliferation of the anaerobe
Propionibacterium acnes.
E. Although the 3 factors discussed above are responsible for the
overwhelming majority of acne, it is important to keep in
mind other factors that may be contribute to the disease.
1. Hyperandrogen states (eg, polycystic ovary syndrome
[PCOS] or androgenic progestins in oral contraception).
2. Exposure to topical comedogens (cocoa butter, mineral
oil, lanolin, fatty acids).
3. Numerous factors that lead to follicular obstruction (eg,
habits or clothing that cause skin trauma or obstruct
pores, and hot humid environments or heavy sweating
leading to keratin over-hydration).
4. Medications known to trigger or exacerbate acne (eg, cor-
ticosteroids, isoniazid, lithium, androgens)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis is typically clinical.
B. Histopathology will vary depending on the lesion. Come-
dones have a distinctive histologic appearance.
C. Work-up for hyperandrogenism is appropriate when there are
signs of polycystic ovary disease, virilization, or an atypical
presentation (such as later in life).
Treatment
A. Establish that there are none of the acne precipitants dis-
cussed above.
B. Review general skin care techniques for acne-prone skin.
1. Vigorous scrubbing can aggravate acne by promoting
development of inflammatory lesions.
2. Abrasive cleaners and mechanical devices also aggravate
acne by promoting inflammation.
3. Use of a mild cleanser with lukewarm water and one’s
hands is best.
4. Use of moisturizers should be minimized and all cosmet-
ics and lotions should be oil-free.
5. Minimize contact of facial skin with hair gels and other
styling products (pomade acne).
C. Medical therapy is aimed at the 3 factors involved in acne
development.
1. Decreasing sebum production
a. No topical therapies are effective
b. Estrogen
(1) Most effective at doses of > 50 mcg of ethinyl estradiol
(2) Common oral contraceptive pills containing ≤35
mcg ethinyl estradiol are still helpful.
c. Antiandrogens (spironolactone)
d. Isotretinoin (see later discussion)
2. Alteration of epithelial turnover and cohesiveness
a. Topical retinoids: tretinoin, tazarotene
b. Adapalene: a naphthoic acid with retinoid activity
3. P acnes proliferation and accompanying inflammation
a. Topical antibiotics
(1) Erythromycin
(2) Clindamycin
(3) Metronidazole
(4) Benzoyl peroxide
b. Systemic antibiotics
(1) Tetracycline class
(2) Erythromycin
(3) Clindamycin
D. Guidelines for the use of these medications are as follows:
1. Predominantly comedonal acne: retinoid or adapalene
2. Mild inflammatory acne: topical antibiotic with or with-
out retinoid or adapalene
3. Moderate to severe but noncystic inflammatory acne: sys-
temic antibiotic in combination with a topical regimen
4. Nodular cystic acne: isotretinoin
a. Because of potential adverse effects with isotretinoin, it
should only be prescribed by clinicians experienced in
its use.
b. Isotretinoin has the potential to cause hypertriglyc-
eridemia and depression.
c. Isotretinoin is a potent teratogen and effective contra-
ception must be assured.
E. Additional considerations
1. Oral contraceptives are useful in women with a strong
hormonal component.
388 /  CHAPTER 24
RASH /  389
2. Spironolactone can be useful in adult women with recalci-
trant acne.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
A clinical diagnosis of acne is most likely. Although PCOS might
by considered based on the older age of the patient and the distri-
bution of lesions along the jaw line, the patient lacks the
oligomenorrhea that, along with evidence of hyperandrogenism, is
necessary for making the diagnosis.
A clinical diagnosis of acne is made, and discussion begins as to
the most appropriate therapy.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, acne vulgaris? Have
you ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alterna-
tive diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Rosacea
Textbook Presentation
Commonly presents in adults with a facial rash. There is gradual
development of telangiectasias and persistent centrofacial ery-
thema occasionally with inflammatory red papules and papulo-
pustules. Comedones are absent. There is often a history of easy
flushing. The rash may worsen with sun exposure, ingestion of
spicy food and hot liquids, emotional stress, and exercise.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: centrofacial persistent facial erythema,
telangiectasias, and, occasionally, inflammatory papules and
papulopustules (Figure 24–2).
B. Rosacea is most common in fair-skinned individuals of north-
ern European descent but can be seen in people with darker
skin as well.
C. Women are more commonly affected than men.
D. However, complicated disease with sebaceous gland hyperpla-
sia and rhinophyma (sebaceous overgrowth causing deformity
of the nose) develops more often in men.
E. Although rosacea typically begins later than acne and reaches
a peak in middle age, the two can overlap.
F. Although sun exposure is thought to be a trigger of rosacea,
and sun-damaged skin is frequently observed, self-reported
sun sensitivity is infrequent.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is by clinical presentation.
B. Histopathology varies according to the stage and variant of
the disease and is often nonspecific.
Treatment
A. Sun protection
B. Avoidance of triggers of flushing
1. Sun exposure
2. Ingestion of spicy foods and hot liquids
3. Emotional stressors
4. Physical exertion: encourage frequent cool-downs
C. Topical agents: metronidazole decreases erythema and pre-
vents papules and papulopustules.
D. Systemic agents: oral antibiotics of the tetracycline class con-
trol severe eruptions of inflammatory lesions.
E. Laser treatment
1. Used to ablate telangiectasias and improve background
erythema.
2. May be helpful to reduce rhinophyma.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
A management plan was discussed with the patient,
including an appropriate skin care regimen, appropriate
product selection, and use of systemic and topical med-
ications. At follow-up in 3 months, the patient had sig-
nificantly fewer active lesions with evidence of dyspig-
mentation associated with resolving lesions.
Figure 24–2. Rosacea. (See Plate 2.) (Photograph courtesy of
Dr. Anne E. Laumann.) 
390 /  CHAPTER 24
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mr. B is a 13-year-old boy who was in good health until
1 week ago, when he noted that the left side of his chest
was painful. One day before his visit, he noticed a rash on
the left side of his chest, just lateral to his sternum. He
describes the rash as small bumps, blisters, and red
patches. He says that the skin is extremely sensitive to
light touch. He otherwise feels well, without fever or con-
stitutional symptoms.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Several general etiologic categories need to be considered when
presented with a patient with new-onset blisters or vesicles. Blis-
ters can be a symptom of infection, autoimmune disease, or a reac-
tion to an external stimulus. Infectious causes include varicella
zoster virus (VZV), presenting either as chickenpox or herpes
zoster (shingles), and bullous impetigo. Both are possible in this
patient. The prodromal pain suggests VZV. Bullous impetigo can
cause blisters in a young, healthy person, but these blisters often
begin in intertriginous areas. Bullous impetigo is most common in
children. Grouped blisters suggest VZV or herpes simplex virus
(HSV), whereas other blistering diseases may demonstrate large
distinct blisters or erosions.
Bullous arthropod bites can affect patients of any age. A history
of exposure should be elicited. The numerous, small, clustered
lesions in this case make arthropod bites a less likely diagnosis. Bul-
lous pemphigoid and other autoimmune blistering disorders are rare
but possible. Stevens-Johnson syndrome is unlikely given the suba-
cute onset but is certainly a “must not miss” diagnosis (Table 24–2).
2
The patient reports no significant medical history. He
recently finished a course of amoxicillin for pharyngitis.
He does also frequently help his mother with gardening.
The patient is afebrile with normal vital signs. The physi-
cal exam demonstrates clusters of small vesicles, filled
with clear fluid, overlying erythematous skin. There is no
lymphadenopathy. The rest of the skin exam is unremark-
able (Figure 24–3).
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis:Varicella Zoster Virus
(Herpes Zoster/Shingles)
Textbook Presentation
This condition usually presents as a rash over a single, unilateral
dermatome. The lesions begin as closely grouped vesicles on an
erythematous base. Over 2–3 days, the lesions become pustular
and then crust over after 7–10 days. Pain and paresthesias along
the involved dermatome often precede the rash by a few days.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: small, tightly grouped vesicles
on an erythematous base occurring in one dermatome.
Table 24–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. B.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Varicella
Prodromal pain 
Usually diagnosed 
zoster virus 
symptoms
clinically
Localized lesions
Tzanck smear, direct
in a dermatomal
fluorescent antibody
distribution
test of skin scraping,
culture
Active Alternatives
Bullous
Acute onset,
Bacterial culture of
impetigo
related to skin
lesion
trauma
Bullous
Pruritus
Clinical
arthropod bites
Lack of 
constitutional
symptoms
Exposure history
Bullous
May present with
Skin biopsy and 
pemphigoid
early urticarial
direct 
lesions and pruritus
immunofluorescence
Later intact blisters
of skin
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Stevens-Johnson
Rapidly progressive 
Skin biopsy
syndrome
rash with associated
mucosal lesions
Figure 24–3. Mr. B. on initial presentation. (See Plate 3.)
RASH /  391
(See Figure 24–3.) Very early in the presentation, the
lesions are large papules that then become vesicular, then
pustular, and ultimately crusted.
B. Characteristics of the lesion
1. The rash tends to occur in the region where the rash of
primary VZV infection (chickenpox) was most severe.
a. The most common dermatomes are trigeminal and T3-L2.
b. It is not uncommon to have a few vesicles in contigu-
ous dermatomes.
2. New lesions may appear for several days, occasionally for
up to 7 days.
C. Shingles is caused by reactivation of VZV in a dorsal root
ganglion.
D. Complications
1. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus
a. Can occur when there is involvement of the first divi-
sion trigeminal nerve.
b. Herpes zoster ophthalmicus carries high risk of corneal
damage.
2. Ramsay Hunt syndrome
a. Reactivation of VZV within the geniculate ganglion
b. Causes a Bell palsy (facial paralysis) and ear pain
c. Vesicles can often be seen in the ear canal.
d. Vestibular and hearing disturbances (vertigo and hear-
ing loss or tinnitus) are frequently reported.
E. Disseminated varicella zoster may occur, most often in
immunocompromised patients.
F. Shingles in the elderly
1. Shingles can be associated with significant morbidity in
elderly patients.
2. The rash is more severe and generally lasts longer in the elderly.
3. Postherpetic neuralgia, a potentially debilitating, long-
term pain syndrome, is also most common in the elderly.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of shingles is usually made clinically without
additional tests.
B. Detection of virus by immunofluorescent techniques is rapid
and sensitive.
C. The bedside Tzanck smear of material scraped from a fresh
vesicle can be supportive evidence but cannot distinguish
between VZV and HSV.
D. Viral culture is the gold standard for diagnosis.
Treatment
A. In the immunocompetent, the eruption is self-limited; sup-
portive care with pain relievers may be all that is necessary.
B. Patients with any involvement of the eye should be evaluated
by an ophthalmologist.
C. Antiviral agents
1. When the rash is diagnosed within the first 72 hours, sys-
temic antiviral medications are useful.
2. They decrease the duration and severity of the disease.
3. They prevent dissemination.
4. Early treatment with antiviral agents may also prevent the
development of postherpetic neuralgia.
The use of antiviral drugs is not beneficial if
the rash of herpes zoster has been present
for more than 72 hours.
D. Symptomatic care: soaks and topical antipruritics might be
useful.
E. Corticosteroids
1. There are data that the use of corticosteroids in conjunc-
tion with antiviral agents reduces the duration of the rash
and the acute pain syndrome.
2. The use of corticosteroids remains somewhat controversial
because the studies have shown higher rates of adverse
events in patients treated with corticosteroids.
F. Infection control
1. The vesicle fluid is infectious to individuals who have not
had chickenpox or been vaccinated.
2. Infection risk can, therefore, be reduced by preventing
direct contact with the vesicle fluid.
G. Postherpetic neuralgia
1. Most commonly complicates disease in the elderly
2. Potentially severe neuropathic pain syndrome
3. Can be treated with tricyclic antidepressants, gabapentin,
or opioids
4. Intrathecal methylprednisolone and lidocaine are effective
for refractory disease.
H. Prevention
1. A vaccine is now available for the prevention of herpes
zoster.
2. The original trial of this vaccine was conducted in a pop-
ulation over 60 years of age and demonstrated a 48.5%
reduction in episodes of zoster (NNT = 63) and a 45%
reduction in cases of postherpetic neuralgia (NNT = 434). 
3. The vaccine is recommended for patients over 60.
4. Because this is a live-virus vaccine, it is contraindicated in
patients who are immunosuppressed, pregnant, or plan-
ning pregnancy. 
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Given the patient’s prodromal symptoms, VZV is the leading
diagnosis. Because the rash was believed to be somewhat atypical,
a fresh vesicle was unroofed with a scalpel tip and the base of the
vesicle was scraped and smeared onto a microscope slide. The slide
was transported to the laboratory for a direct fluorescent antibody
assay.
The diagnosis of varicella zoster is often clinical. The distribu-
tion and clinical appearance of lesions, as well as the associated
prodromal symptoms, can make the diagnosis obvious. Impetigo,
bullous arthropod bites, and autoimmune blistering diseases will
typically demonstrate larger distinct blisters or erosions. Stevens-
Johnson syndrome and other drug reactions must always be con-
sidered when medications are in use. This patient was taking
amoxicillin. The clinical appearance of the lesions, their localized
distribution, and the overall time course of the symptoms is not
consistent with this eruption, so VZV must still lead the list.
392 /  CHAPTER 24
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, varicella zoster?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Bullous Impetigo
Textbook Presentation
Most commonly seen in children, bullous impetigo presents as
flaccid, transparent bullae in the intertriginous areas. The blisters
rupture easily and leave a rim of scale and a shallow moist erosion.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: flaccid bullae on normal skin
(Figure 24–4)
B. Location of the lesion
1. Develops on grossly intact skin as a result of local toxin
production.
2. This is in contrast to nonbullous impetigo, shown in
Figure 24–5, resulting from Staphylococcus or Streptococcus
infection, which tends to affect previously traumatized skin.
3. Lesions most commonly develop on moist, intertriginous skin.
C. Superficial skin infection that most commonly affects infants
and young children
D. The causative agent is Staphylococcus aureus.
E. The blistering is caused by the production of exfoliatin or epi-
dermolytic toxins.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is by clinical presentation.
B. Culture of blister fluid or the moist edge of a crusted plaque
may be diagnostic.
Treatment
A. Oral antibiotics active against S aureus should be prescribed
for bullous impetigo. The possibility of methicillin-resistant
S aureus (MRSA) must be considered.
B. Localized nonbullous impetigo may be adequately treated with
topical antibiotics effective against gram-positive cocci such as:
1. Bacitracin
2. Polymyxin
3. Mupirocin
C. Recurrent infections may indicate staphylococcal carriage.
Eradication measures including daily washing with chlorhex-
idine gluconate, intranasal mupirocin ointment, and oral
rifampin and doxycycline have been modestly successful.
D. Family members and close contacts may also be colonized and
warrant investigation and treatment when appropriate.
Alternative Diagnosis: Bullous
Arthropod Bites
Textbook Presentation
This condition commonly presents as a cluster of tense blisters on
exposed skin. The blisters tend to be large (≥1 cm) and sur-
rounding skin is normal.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: large, often tense blisters on normal
skin (Figure 24–6).
Figure 24–4. Bullous impetigo. (See Plate 4.)
Figure 24–5. Impetigo. (See Plate 5.)
Figure 24–6. Bullous arthropod bites. (See Plate 6.)
RASH /  393
B. Character and location of the lesion
1. The lesions tend to develop in exposed areas of the skin,
such as the extremities.
2. The patient will otherwise appear well.
3. The lesions are typically extraordinarily pruritic.
4. Although the blisters arise from otherwise normal skin,
surrounding inflammatory changes from rubbing and
scratching are often present.
C. Arthropod bite reactions are dermal hypersensitivity reactions
to antigens in the saliva of insects.
D. Fleas and bedbugs are common culprits.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosis is made by clinical presentation.
B. Histopathology can be supportive, demonstrating edema, a
subepidermal blister, and a dermal inflammatory infiltrate with
numerous eosinophils.
Treatment
A. Avoidance of future bites with use of protective clothing and
insect repellants.
B. Attention to eradicating the source of the biting insects, such
as on pets, nests, etc.
C. Supportive local care to prevent secondary infection and relieve
pruritus.
Alternative Diagnosis: Bullous Pemphigoid
Textbook Presentation
Bullous pemphigoid is usually seen in elderly patients with the sud-
den onset of 1–2 cm tense blisters and bright red, urticarial plaques.
Lesions often begin on the lower extremities and progress upward.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: tense bullae arising on skin that
may be normal, erythematous, or urticarial (Figure 24–7).
B. Bullous pemphigoid is an autoimmune disease primarily affect-
ing the elderly.
C. Autoantibodies are targeted against components of the epi-
dermal basement membrane zone, thus triggering separation
and blistering.
D. The lesions heal without scarring.
E. Most cases occur sporadically without obvious precipitating
factors.
F. Character and location of the lesion
1. Predilection of blisters for the extremities
2. Lesions range from asymptomatic to intensely pruritic.
3. Mucosal surfaces are rarely involved.
G. Antibodies to several elements of the basements membrane
zone have been isolated. These distinct antibodies cause other
blistering syndromes, such as pemphigus vulgaris and epider-
molysis bullosa acquisita.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Histopathology provides supportive information, demonstrating
a subepidermal blister plane and accumulation of eosinophils.
B. Immunopathology confirms the diagnosis by demonstrating lin-
ear deposits of IgG and C3 at the dermal–epidermal junction.
C. In 70–80% of patients, circulating IgG that recognizes the iden-
tified antigens of the basement membrane zone can be found.
Treatment
A. Topical, potent corticosteroids can be effective.
B. Extensive disease can be treated with systemic corticosteroids.
C. Steroid-sparing immunosuppressives are used to limit the tox-
icities of systemic corticosteroids in chronic disease.
D. Alternative antiinflammatory regimens such as tetracycline
and nicotinamide may be effective.
E. Remission is usually obtained within a few weeks; however,
some degree of long-term therapy may be necessary.
F. Refractory cases may respond to plasmapheresis or intravenous
gammaglobulin.
Alternative Diagnosis:
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
Textbook Presentation
Stevens-Johnson syndrome typically presents in a patient with fever,
malaise, headache, and myalgias who is taking a potentially
causative medication. After about 1 week of symptoms, a macular
rash develops on the chest and face. These lesions subsequently blis-
ter and then rapidly erode. The skin is usually excruciatingly tender.
Figure 24–7. Bullous pemphigoid. (See Plate 7.) (Photograph
courtesy of Dr. Keith Duffy.)
394 /  CHAPTER 24
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: flaccid bullae and vesicles that
develop centrally within preexisting target lesion. The bullae
rapidly erode, leaving red and raw skin (Figure 24–8).
B. Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis are
hypersensitivity reaction patterns involving the skin.
1. These 2 conditions are often considered to be on a
spectrum of severity. Stevens-Johnson syndrome
involves less body surface area, whereas toxic epidermal
necrolysis leads to considerable areas of full-thickness
skin sloughing.
2. Although the precise cause has not been found, drugs are
involved in most cases.
C. More than 200 drugs have been implicated as causes of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis.
D. A well-done case-control trial identified the most likely culprits.
These are listed in Table 24–3 with their associated ORs.
E. Disease course
1. Prodromal symptoms, characterized by fever, malaise,
headache, myalgias, as well as GI and respiratory complaints,
occur over 1–2 weeks.
2. The rash occurs initially on the face and central trunk as
pink to red macules and papules.
3. The rash may spread and evolve rapidly, with individual
lesions becoming targetoid with dusky centers and ulti-
mately coalescing into larger plaques.
4. Flaccid bullae and vesicles may develop centrally within
targets as the skin necroses.
5. Blisters form and rapidly erode, leaving red and raw skin
that becomes coated by a gray-white pseudomembrane.
6. Mucous membranes
a. Lesions on mucous membranes may accompany or
precede the skin rash.
b. The mucosal surfaces may be tender and burning.
c. The lips are often swollen, cracked, bleeding, and crusted.
7. The skin is extremely tender.
A hallmark of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis is the presence of exquisite skin
tenderness.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Histopathology supports the clinical impression.
B. Pathology demonstrates epidermal necrosis with minimal evi-
dence of epidermal and dermal inflammation.
Treatment
A. If an offending drug is present, it must be discontinued.
B. Studies support the use of intravenous immunoglobulin in
the early stages of the disease to abort progression.
C. Use of systemic corticosteroids is controversial. Studies have not
proven that the benefit outweighs risk of immunosuppression.
D. Supportive care in a burn unit is recommended.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Within the hour the laboratory reported fluorescent anti-
body labeling of VZV, thus confirming the diagnosis of
varicella zoster. The patient was prescribed valacyclovir
for 7 days. He was instructed to keep the skin lesions
covered to prevent contacts from being exposed to the
infective vesicle fluid. He was counseled to avoid close
contact with young infants and immunosuppressed indi-
viduals until all skin lesions are crusted.
Figure 24–8. Stevens-Johnson syndrome. (See Plate 8.)
Table 24–3. Medications most commonly implicated in
Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Medications
OR
Short-term
Sulfonamide antibiotics
172
Aminopenicillins
6.7
Quinolones
10
Cephalosporins
14
Long-term
Carbamazepine
90
Phenobarbital
45
Phenytoin
53
Valproic acid
25
Piroxicam
12
Allopurinol
52
Corticosteroids
54
Data from Roujeau JC, Kelly JP, Naldi L et al. Medication use and the risk of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. N Engl J Med.
1995; 333:1600–7. Copyright © 1995 Massachusetts Medical Society. All
rights reserved.
RASH /  395
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Ms. M is a 16-year-old developing girl who has many small
red flaky patches, first on her trunk and now spreading to
her extremities over the last 2 weeks (Figure 24–9). She
denies any history of similar eruptions. She states she is
otherwise feeling well. This eruption is not particularly itchy.
On examination, there are many 1–2 cm discrete, brightly
erythematous plaques and papules with adherent white
scale. The lesions are predominantly on the trunk but
extend onto the extremities. Some lesions appear some-
what linear in configuration, whereas most are round to
oval in shape. The scale is confluent over the surface of the
lesions. The nails are normal and the palms and soles are
clear. The oropharynx is injected with some tonsillar
enlargement but without exudates. The tongue appears
geographic. The rest of the physical exam is unremarkable.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The appearance of the eruption suggests that this condition is
papulosquamous in morphology (ie, it is composed primarily of
papules and plaques with scale). Common causes of papulosqua-
mous eruptions are psoriasis, pityriasis rosea, fungal infections,
and nummular dermatitis.
The patient’s age, acute onset of the rash, and the pattern of
small papules and plaques are pivotal points suggesting either gut-
tate psoriasis or pityriasis rosea. In addition, the finding of pharyn-
geal injection suggests that there may be an infectious component
(as is common with guttate psoriasis). The configuration of the
lesions and the scale can be very helpful in narrowing the differen-
tial diagnosis. This patient’s scale is confluent over the surface of
the lesions, consistent with guttate psoriasis, whereas tinea and
pityriasis rosea typically have an annular scale. Nummular der-
matitis is usually found on the extremities and is associated with
significant pruritus, making it an unlikely diagnosis in this case.
Secondary syphilis needs to be considered as a “must not miss”
diagnosis. Syphilis can present with plaques, but they often involve
the palms and soles and lack an adherent scale (Table 24–4).
3
On further questioning, the patient does recall a sore
throat several weeks ago. Her medical history is unremark-
able. Her family history is remarkable only for a father with
psoriasis.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Guttate Psoriasis
Textbook Presentation
Guttate psoriasis generally presents with small, round, and slightly
oval lesions on the back and trunk. The lesions have somewhat sil-
very, adherent scales.
Figure 24–9. Ms. M on initial presentation. (See Plate 9.)
Table 24–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Ms. M.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Guttate psoriasis
Presents after
Morphology and
acute pharyngitis
pattern of lesions
Discrete small red
and positive throat
plaques with
culture
adherent silvery scale
Active Alternatives
Pityriasis rosea
Classically starts with
Clinical diagnosis
a single “herald patch”
1-2 weeks prior to
disseminated eruption
Tinea corporis
Solitary or few lesions
Identification of 
Annular lesions with
fungus with KOH 
a leading edge of scale
or culture.
Pruritic
Nummular
Well-defined plaques 
Clinical diagnosis
dermatitis
with crust and
papulovesicles
Pruritic
Symmetric distribution
on extremities
Secondary
Palms and soles involved
RPR, FTA
syphilis
Thinner plaques
without adherent scale
396 /  CHAPTER 24
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: small 0.5–1.5-cm, round or slightly
oval lesions with characteristic overlying silvery scales. (See
Figure 24–9.)
B. Character of the lesion
1. Lesions tend to occur over the upper trunk and proximal
extremities.
2. Face, ears, and scalp may also be involved.
3. The lesions may localize to sites of minor skin trauma,
such as scrapes (Koebner phenomenon).
4. Eruption generally persists for 3–4 months and then
remits spontaneously.
C. Most commonly seen in young adults, frequently preceded by
a streptococcal throat infection.
D. Affected patients are at increased risk for development of pso-
riasis vulgaris in the next 3–5 years.
E. There is an increased incidence of psoriasis in families.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis is often made based on the clinical presentation.
B. Finding of a streptococcal pharyngitis is supportive.
C. A skin biopsy of an established lesion may demonstrate clas-
sic histologic findings of psoriasis vulgaris.
Treatment
A. Guttate psoriasis is typically a self-limited eruption, although
clearance can take weeks to months.
B. Remission can be hastened with the use of UV light treatments.
C. Antibiotics such as erythromycin and tetracycline can be
additionally helpful for flares.
1. There is an infectious trigger in most cases.
2. These antibiotics also function as suppressors of inflam-
mation in the skin.
D. Topical corticosteroids can be effective on individual lesions.
E. Systemic corticosteroids should be avoided in psoriasis because
withdrawal may trigger flares.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Based on the lesion’s morphology, family history, and recent pharyn-
gitis, guttate psoriasis was considered the likely diagnosis. A throat
culture was sent. A skin biopsy was considered but not performed.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, guttate psoriasis?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Pityriasis Rosea
Textbook Presentation
Pityriasis rosea commonly presents as a “herald patch” and then
progresses to small, oval, scaly plaques over the trunk. The rash is
mildly pruritic.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: oval or round plaque with scale
(Figure 24–10). 
B. Character of the lesion
1. The primary eruption appears as a single oval or round,
pink to brownish plaque with a collarette of scale around
the inner margin of the lesion (the herald patch). This her-
ald patch most often occurs on the trunk and is often mis-
diagnosed as tinea corporis.
2. One to 2 weeks after the appearance of the herald patch,
the secondary eruption emerges as generalized smaller but
similar oval scaly plaques distributed along skin tension
lines in a “fir tree” pattern.
3. Variable degrees of pruritus
4. Spontaneous resolution occurs over 8–12 weeks, often
with subsequent postinflammatory hypopigmentation or
hyperpigmentation.
C. A history of a mild prodrome of malaise, nausea, headache,
and low-grade fever may be present.
D. Pityriasis rosea is a common worldwide disease without genetic or
racial predilection, occurring sporadically throughout the year.
E. A viral cause is postulated; evidence suggests but does not
confirm a role for human herpesvirus 7.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis is clinical, based on morphology and distribu-
tion of the skin lesions.
B. Skin biopsy demonstrates many nonspecific findings of a sub-
acute dermatitis but can provide supportive evidence for the
diagnosis.
Treatment
A. No specific treatment is indicated or effective; the condition
resolves over 8–12 weeks.
B. In cases with severe pruritus, symptomatic treatments, such as
antihistamines and mild topical corticosteroids, may be beneficial.
C. UV B phototherapy has been advocated to decrease the sever-
ity, particularly when administered early in the course. This
treatment may worsen the postinflammatory dyspigmentation.
Figure 24–10. Pityriasis rosea. (See Plate 10.)
RASH /  397
Alternative Diagnosis:Tinea Corporis
Textbook Presentation
Tinea corporis commonly presents as round, pink, plaques with
small peripheral papules and a rim of scales. The neck and back
are the most common locations (Figure 24–11).
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: multiple lesions are possible.
1. Circular lesions with a sharply marginated raised border
and central clearing, arising by centrifugal spread of the
fungus from the initial site of infection
2. Inflammatory lesions may demonstrate pustules or vesi-
cles, especially around the margin.
3. Overlying scale is common, typically more prominent at
the border of the lesion.
4. Solitary lesions may occur, or there may be multiple
plaques that remain discrete or become confluent.
B. The degree of associated inflammatory change is variable,
depending on the causative species of fungus.
C. The wide variation in clinical presentation depends on the
species of fungus, size of the inoculum, body site infected, and
immune status of the patient.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Identification of the fungus by microscopic examination of
scales after application of 5–20% potassium hydroxide
B. Culture of tissue material (such as the scale)
C. Histopathology is rarely necessary to make the diagnosis of a
superficial infection, but with the use of fungal stains the cell
walls may be visible in fixed sections.
Treatment
A. Both topical and systemic antifungal agents are effective.
B. Decision of which to use is based on the extent and location
of the infection.
C. Hair-bearing sites often require systemic therapy.
Alternative Diagnosis: Nummular Dermatitis
Textbook Presentation
Nummular dermatitis generally presents as an extremely pruritic
rash of numerous, round, crusted lesions on a patient’s legs.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesions: well-demarcated coin-shaped lesions
composed of minute vesicles and papules on an erythematous
base. The lesions have an overlying crust, frequently with a
weeping exudate (Figure 24–12).
B. Nummular dermatitis is an acute eruption of numerous
lesions predominantly on the extremities.
C. The lesions are severely pruritic.
D. The eruption runs a remitting and relapsing course.
E. Patients are often atopic.
F. Secondary infection is frequently present.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Microscopic examination of a scraping will rule out tinea.
B. Histopathology can assist in the diagnosis by demonstrating
the features of an acute dermatitis.
Treatment
A. If present, secondary infections often require treatment with
systemic antibiotics.
B. Antihistamines can help alleviate the pruritus.
C. Skin care, especially bathing practices and appropriate use of
emollients, should be stressed.
D. Topical corticosteroids are useful for flares.
Alternative Diagnosis: Secondary Syphilis
Textbook Presentation
Secondary syphilis presents as oval macules in sexually active peo-
ple. The lesions are present diffusely, including on the palms and
soles. A history of a transient, painless, genital ulcer in the pre-
ceding weeks can often be obtained.
Figure 24–11. Tinea corporis. (See Plate 11.)
Figure 24–12. Nummular dermatitis. (See Plate 12.)
398 /  CHAPTER 24
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: papules and plaques distributed over the
entire body. They are copper red to hyperpigmented in color.
B. Character of the lesion
1. There may be variable lesions at different stages of disease.
a. A fleeting eruption of symmetric, coppery red, round
and oval macules may be seen early in the secondary
stage, about 8 weeks after the infecting exposure.
b. The later, classic eruption includes involvement of
mucosal surfaces and palms and soles.
c. In the latest phases, thick scales may cover the plaques.
2. The rashes of secondary syphilis are nonpruritic.
3. The lesions are generally symmetrically distributed.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The Venereal Disease Research Laboratories (VDRL) and flu-
orescent treponemal antibody (FTA) tests are 100% sensitive
for secondary syphilis.
B. FTA tests have specificities in the high 90% range.
Treatment
Penicillin is the treatment of choice for secondary syphilis.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
The patient’s throat culture revealed group A strepto-
coccus. A clinical diagnosis of guttate psoriasis was
made. The patient was prescribed a 3-week course of
erythromycin as well as topical corticosteroids and top-
ical calcipotriene (a vitamin D derivative). UV B treat-
ments, 3 times weekly, were begun to induce remission of
the psoriatic flare. She was counseled on her risk for
future development of psoriasis vulgaris.
Guttate psoriasis affects those with a predisposition toward psoriasis.
The guttate flares tend to remit quite reliably; however, affected indi-
viduals are at increased risk for the development of chronic psoriasis.
OTHER IMPORTANT CUTANEOUS DISORDERS
Urticaria
Textbook Presentation
Urticaria typically presents as an itchy rash with large or small, pal-
pable, red areas over the entire body. The rash is variable, with no
one lesion lasting very long. Both the rash and the pruritus
respond to antihistamines.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: transient pink to red smooth flat-
topped papules and plaques that may coalesce into giant
lesions. The lesions often leave purple discoloration or central
clearing when they fade (Figure 24–13).
B. Characteristics of the lesion
1. Individual lesions should resolve within 24 hours while
new lesions may continue to develop.
2. The eruption is typically accompanied by itch, but excori-
ations are rare.
C. Mucous membranes, eyelids, hands, and feet may develop
deeper subcutaneous swelling manifesting as angioedema.
D. Most urticaria is acute, lasting less than 6 weeks.
E. Urticaria is a hypersensitivity reaction to numerous insults.
1. Etiologic factors can be remembered with the mnemonic
I-I-I-I-I.
a. Infection
b. Infestation
c. Ingestion
d. Inhalation
e. Injection
2. Idiopathic should probably be added to this list because
the etiologic agent may induce an immunologic cascade
that persists in the absence of the inciting agent.
F. Chronic urticaria can also be seen in the setting of systemic
disease such as collagen vascular disease, malignancy, para-
sitosis, and chronic infection.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Clinical findings of typical transient urticaria are diagnostic,
and a skin biopsy is rarely indicated.
B. The morphologic differential diagnosis often includes the
following:
1. Erythema multiforme (because of the targetoid appear-
ance of some urticaria)
2. Insect bite reactions
3. The early phases of bullous pemphigoid
C. Urticaria can be distinguished from all of the above disorders
because it is the only one with lesions that last less than 24 hours.
D. A careful history, including review of medications, recent
exposures, and food ingestion, is the most important aspect of
the evaluation to determine a cause.
E. Laboratory evaluation is sometimes undertaken in cases of
chronic urticaria, but studies have shown that relevant results
are so rarely found without other symptoms that this approach
is discouraged.
Figure 24–13. Urticaria. (See Plate 13.)
RASH /  399
Treatment
A. Identification of the inciting agent (medication, supplement,
infection) is paramount and should be addressed as the first
step in management.
B. Antihistamines are the mainstay of therapy. H1-blockers should
be given on a regular dosing schedule until the eruption is sup-
pressed and then tapered gradually to prevent rebound flare.
C. Combinations of different H1-blockers can be effective when
a single agent is inadequate.
D. Addition of H2-blockers may be helpful in refractory cases.
Purpura/Petechiae
Textbook Presentation
Purpura and petechiae are seen in patients with bleeding diatheses
or vascular damage. Petechiae are capillary hemorrhages that pres-
ent as nonblanching, pinpoint, red spots over dependent body
parts, most commonly the lower extremities. Purpura are larger
hemorrhages into the skin.
Purpura are associated with a variety of life-threat-
ening diseases such as vasculitis and sepsis.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of the lesion: petechiae are red, blue or purple,
nonblanching, pinpoint spots. Purpura are larger (up to sev-
eral centimeters) macules, papules, or plaques that may or
may not be palpable (Figure 24–14).
B. Both purpura and petechiae are, to some degree, nonblanch-
ing; (ie, the color cannot be compressed out of the lesion by
pressure).
C. The shape of these lesions is variable, ranging from stellate to
round or oval or targetoid to retiform (netlike).
D. The color, texture, and configuration of these lesions will be
helpful in constructing a differential diagnosis of the cause.
E. The differential diagnosis of purpura/petechiae is vast, and
many classification schemes have been proposed. The first step
is to differentiate ecchymoses from purpura and petechiae.
F. Ecchymoses
1. Ecchymoses are the most common form of hemorrhage in
the skin.
2. They are typically induced by trauma and, therefore, are
seen on trauma-prone sites such as the dorsal hand, fore-
arm, lateral thigh, and shin.
3. The shape of ecchymoses tends to be geometric (rectangu-
lar) or linear because they are induced by an external force.
4. Predisposing factors to ecchymoses include weakening of
the dermal structure secondary to age, corticosteroid use,
solar damage, and vitamin C deficiency (scurvy), as well as
coagulation defects.
G. Petechiae are most commonly associated with thrombocytopenia.
Petechiae are commonly caused by thrombocytopenia.
H. Purpura
1. Like petechiae, purpura signify hemorrhage into the skin.
2. The hemorrhage may
a. Be simple extravasation through leaky vessel walls.
b. Be accompanied by inflammation that is damaging
vessel walls. (These lesions are often partially blanching
because the inflammatory component blanches while
the hemorrhagic component does not.)
c. Be the result of occlusion of a vessel leading to ischemic
damage to the skin.
3. The degree to which purpuric lesions are palpable is help-
ful diagnostically.
a. Nonpalpable hemorrhage in the skin is most concerning
for thrombocytopenia or abnormal platelet function.
b. Extravasation of blood alone into deep tissue layers can
produce a nodule (such as occurs with a hematoma).
c. Edema associated with the vessel injury (such as in cases
of inflammatory vasculitis) may cause a palpable lesion.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. An evaluation of clotting (platelet number, function and
measures of coagulation) is indicated to determine if purpura
and petechiae are symptoms of a coagulopathy or vasculitis.
B. A skin biopsy can be helpful in determining
1. The size and location of affected vessels within the dermal
and subcutaneous tissues.
2. The degree and character of associated inflammation.
3. The type of vessel damage (leukocytoclastic or granulomatous).
4. The presence and character of any occlusions within ves-
sels (organisms, calcium, fibrin).
C. Immunofluorescence studies of histologic specimens can be
helpful in identifying antibody and complement deposits on
vessels walls.
Treatment
A. Treatment is directed toward management of the underlying
cause of the vessel damage.
B. Supportive therapy includes local wound care and prevention
of secondary infection.
Figure 24–14. Purpura. (See Plate 14.)
400 /  CHAPTER 24
Skin Cancer
There are innumerable specific forms of skin cancer, deriving from
all of the structures of the skin and subcutaneous tissues. In addi-
tion, many cancers will metastasize to the skin. The three most
common skin cancers are described.
1. Basal Cell Carcinoma
Textbook Presentation
Basal cell carcinoma most commonly presents as a flesh-colored,
translucent, or slightly red papule or nodule, classically displaying
a rolled border. Most commonly presents on the head or neck of
older adults.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: the typical lesion is a flesh-colored,
translucent, or slightly red papule or nodule, classically dis-
playing a rolled border (Figure 24–15).
1. Lesions are often friable, bleeding easily and developing
crust. Telangiectasias on the surface can be a helpful sign.
2. Large tumors can be locally destructive.
B. Basal cell carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor in
humans.
C. Lesions are typically asymptomatic except for the observation
of easy bleeding from a site.
1. Only rarely is pain associated.
2. Metastasis from a basal cell carcinoma is rare.
D. Individuals at risk are adults with fair hair and eyes, easy
freckling, and propensity for sunburn
1. Patients with skin of color are less likely to be affected.
2. Men and women are about equally affected.
3. Exposure to UV light has long been believed to play a
causative role in the development of this tumor, although
the exact mechanism is not clear.
4. Chronic wounds and sites of inflammation as well as
immunosuppression can predispose to development of
this tumor.
5. Exposure to arsenic is another risk factor for basal cell
carcinoma.
E. The head and neck are the most common sites affected with
this tumor.
1. Only 10–15% of tumors develop on sun-protected skin.
2. The nose is the most common site, accounting for
20–30% of all cases.
F. Basal cell carcinoma is likely derived from the hair follicle.
The name implies a resemblance of the tumor cells to the
basal cells of the epidermis, although this is not believed to be
their derivation.
G. Patients have up to a 45% risk of developing subsequent basal
cell carcinomas in the 5 years after initial diagnosis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
Histologic evaluation of affected tissue is the gold standard for
diagnosis.
Treatment
A. The goal of therapy is to eliminate the tumor and prevent local
tissue destruction. Numerous methods are available to accom-
plish this goal, and selection depends on tumor size, type, and
location, patient characteristics, and patient preferences.
B. Five-year recurrence rates vary by treatment modality. The low-
est recurrence rate is achieved with Mohs micrographic surgery.
1. This method involves excision of the visible tumor, fol-
lowed by microscopic evaluation of frozen tissue sections
to visualize tumor margins and repeat local excision until
all margins are clear of tumor.
2. The technique allows for maximal tissue sparing while
ensuring complete eradication of tumor.
C. Follow-up of patients for recurrent, or subsequent tumors is
critical.
2. Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Textbook Presentation
Squamous cell carcinoma most commonly presents as a firm but
somewhat indistinct nodule. It may evolve from actinic keratoses
on the sun-exposed skin of middle-aged people.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: lesions are firm but somewhat indis-
tinct nodules that may arise from an in situ carcinoma or in
normal skin. Tumors may become ulcerated or bleed easily
and become crusted (Figure 24–16).
1. The surface may be smooth, verrucous, or papillomatous,
with or without scaling.
Figure 24–15. Basal cell carcinoma. (See Plate 15.) (Photograph
courtesy of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.) 
RASH /  401
2. Fixation to underlying structures develops as the lesion
invades locally.
3. In situ lesions tend to be sharply demarcated erythematous
scaling plaques.
B. This tumor most commonly affects fair-skinned individuals
with excessive sun exposure.
1. Often evolves from actinic keratoses on sun-exposed skin
in these patients.
2. UV radiation is a major risk factor for the development of
this tumor.
3. Additional predisposing factors include
a. Radiation therapy 
b. Chronic scar formation
c. Chemical carcinogens, such as hydrocarbons
d. Viral exposures
e. Thermal exposures
f. Arsenic
g. Long-term immunosuppression (such as in renal trans-
plant recipients).
C. Metastasis from squamous cell carcinoma is a significant risk.
1. The incidence of metastasis varies greatly with anatomic
location, level of invasion, and cellular differentiation and
also depends on the individual tumor precipitants.
2. The incidence of metastasis from squamous cell carcinoma
ranges from 1% to 20% in some series and is as high as
42% in others.
3. Cutaneous lesions arising in solar keratosis have the lowest
risk for metastasis, and lip lesions have the highest. Mucosal
squamous cell carcinomas in general have a higher risk of
metastasis.
D. Oral squamous cell carcinoma is predominantly a disease of
adult men.
1. Risk factors are alcohol and tobacco use.
2. When detected in the early asymptomatic stage, these can-
cers are easily curable.
E. Incidence increases with age and varies with geographic loca-
tion, ethnicity, and behavior patterns.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Histologic evaluation of affected tissue is the gold standard for
diagnosis.
B. A high index of suspicion may be necessary to recognize a
potential tumor when its appearance or location is unusual.
For example, the verrucous form of squamous cell carcinoma
can be mistaken for a wart.
Treatment
A. The goal of treatment is eradication of the tumor while pro-
ducing the least disability and dysfunction for the patient.
B. Careful evaluation for the presence of metastatic disease is
paramount. This may include lymph node dissection in some
instances.
C. Multiple destruction modalities are available and are selected
based on size, shape, and location of the tumor as well as patient
preferences. These modalities include, but are not limited to
1. Excisional surgery
2. Mohs micrographic surgery
3. Electrosurgery
4. Radiation therapy
5. Local immunotherapy
D. Wide destruction of these tumors usually results in cure as
squamous cell carcinomas grow by direct extension. However,
residual tumor can invade and extend along peripheral nerves,
allowing a deep recurrence on occasion.
E. A large percentage of squamous cell carcinomas could be pre-
vented by avoidance of excessive solar exposure. Routine screen-
ing for tumors, especially in high-risk patients, is also imperative.
3. Melanoma
Textbook Presentation
Melanoma presents as a dark brown macule in a middle-aged per-
son. The lesion has pigment variation throughout and irregular
borders.
Disease Highlights
A. Description of lesion: the most common type of melanoma is
superficial spreading (Figure 24–17).
1. These tumors may present as a dark brown to black macule
or thin plaque, typically with pigment variation throughout
and irregular borders.
2. With growth, the surface becomes glossy.
3. The most common location of superficial spreading
melanomas is on the upper back in males and the leg in
females.
B. These cancers are most commonly diagnosed in the fourth
and fifth decades of life.
C. Melanoma may arise in a preexisting melanocytic nevus or
de novo.
D. Multiple subtypes exist, including lentigo maligna melanoma,
superficial spreading melanoma, nodular melanoma, acral lentig-
inous melanoma, and amelanotic melanoma among others.
Figure 24–16. Squamous cell carcinoma. (See Plate 16.) (Photo-
graph courtesy of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
402 /  CHAPTER 24
1. Nodular melanoma is the second most common type of
melanoma.
a. Presents most often on the head, neck, or trunk.
b. These tumors evolve rapidly over months.
c. They appear as a blue-black, reddish, purplish, or even
a nonpigmented papule or nodule.
2. Acral lentiginous melanoma is the predominant type of
melanoma seen in the more pigmented races, such as
Africans, Asians, and Indians.
a. Acral lentiginous melanoma occurs on the palms and
soles and beneath the nail plate.
b. Diagnosis of these lesions is often delayed; therefore,
they are often of a more advanced stage at diagnosis.
c. Affected individuals tend to be older.
3. Lentigo maligna melanoma is a rare type of melanoma
found predominantly in the elderly on the sun-exposed
portions of the head and neck.
a. The tumor is usually flat, with irregular borders and a
diameter of several centimeters.
b. Color varies throughout from tan to brown to black
and purple and blue.
E. Melanoma is a tumor of melanocytes.
1. Benign pigmented nevi are composed of altered
melanocytes, termed “nevomelanocytes.”
2. Malignant transformation of melanocytes and nevome-
lanocytes can result in melanoma, arising de novo from normal
skin, or from a preexisting nevomelanocytic lesion (nevus).
F. The incidence of cutaneous melanoma is increasing steadily in
the United States. In 1935, the lifetime risk of an American
developing melanoma was 1 in 1500 individuals, whereas in
2002 the risk was 1 in 68 individuals.
1. In 2003, it is estimated that melanoma will be diagnosed
in 54,200 Americans, and 7600 will die of the disease.
2. Melanoma will be the fifth most common cancer among
males and the seventh most common cancer among females.
G. Epidemiologic studies strongly suggest that sun exposure is a
major risk factor for the development of cutaneous melanoma
in the light-skinned populations.
1. Intense intermittent episodes of sun exposure before 18 years
of age are thought to engender the highest risk in suscep-
tible populations.
2. Phenotypic features have been associated with increased
risk for cutaneous melanoma: light skin pigmentation,
ease of sunburning, blond or red hair, prominent freck-
ling, and blue or green eyes.
H. Familial melanoma accounts for 8–12% of cases. Those with
at least 2 first-degree relatives with a history of melanoma are
at particularly high risk.
I. Dysplastic nevi (clinically atypical appearing nevi) are
thought to be markers of an individual with an increased risk
of development of cutaneous melanoma.
1. The number of nevi on the body has been directly corre-
lated with the magnitude of melanoma risk.
2. About one-third of melanomas have been associated with
an underlying nevus.
J. Recurrences of disease generally occur in a stepwise manner,
first locally, then in regional lymph nodes, and lastly as distant
metastases.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. An excisional biopsy is the preferred method for obtaining tis-
sue for diagnosis. This preserves the extent of the primary
tumor and all associated histologic features without disrupt-
ing the lymphatic architecture.
B. Full-thickness incisional or punch biopsies of lesions too large
to excise fully or in anatomically sensitive locations are satis-
factory.
C. The histologic diagnosis of melanoma is based on a constella-
tion of features; no single feature is diagnostic. Both cytologic
and architectural features are evaluated.
D. The staging system for melanoma focuses on tumor thickness
and presence of ulceration as the most important initial prog-
nostic variables in localized disease (stages I and II). Stage III
has regional nodal involvement, and stage IV has distant
metastases.
Treatment
A. Management of cutaneous melanoma is guided by stage of
disease. Wide excision of tumors is the general rule.
B. Sentinel lymph node mapping may be beneficial diagnosti-
cally in more advanced stages, decreasing the complications
associated with full lymph node dissections.
C. Adjuvant treatment options for advanced stage disease include
interferon alpha-2b, radiation of nodal basins, chemotherapy,
and other novel strategies such as tumor vaccines.
D. Follow-up of melanoma patients is critical to detect recur-
rences as well as new primary tumors and to provide ongoing
education.
E. Melanoma prevention strategies focus on education about the
risks of UV exposure via sunlight or tanning machines, sun
protection guidelines, and the importance of routine self-skin
exams.
1. Early detection is important for improving outcomes.
Figure 24–17. Malignant melanoma.(See Plate 17.) (Photograph
courtesy of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
RASH /  403
2. Patients should be instructed on the importance of their own
skin examination and what constitutes a worrisome mole,
easily remembered by the ABCDEs of mole evaluation.
a. A: asymmetry
b. B: borders that are irregular or changing
c. C: color that is irregular or changing
d. D: diameter > 6 mm (or larger than a pencil eraser)
e. E: evolution of the lesion in general
REFERENCES
Gnann JW Jr, Whitley RJ. Clinical practice. Herpes zoster. N Engl J Med.
2002;347:340–6.
Kotani N, Kushikata T, Hashimoto H et al. Intrathecal methylprednisolone for
intractable postherpetic neuralgia. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1514–9.
Kozel MM, Mekkes JR, Bossuyt PM, Bos JD. The effectiveness of a history-based
diagnostic approach in chronic urticaria and angioedema. Arch Dermatol.
1998;134:1575–80.
Lens MB, Dawes M. Global perspectives of contemporary epidemiological trends
of cutaneous malignant melanoma. Br J Dermatol. 2004;150:179–85.
Oxman MN, Levin MJ, Johnson GR et al; Shingles Prevention Study Group. A
vaccine to prevent herpes zoster and postherpetic neuralgia in older adults.
N Engl J Med. 2005;352(22):2271–84.
Roujeau JC, Kelly JP, Naldi L et al. Medication use and the risk of Stevens-John-
son syndrome or toxic epidermal necrolysis. N Engl J Med.
1995;333:1600–7.
Simor AE, Phillips E, McGeer A et al. Randomized controlled trial of chlorhexi-
dine gluconate for washing, intranasal mupirocin, and rifampin and doxycy-
cline versus no treatment for the eradication of methicillin-resistant Staphy-
lococcus aureus colonization. Clin Infect Dis. 2007;44(2):178–85.
Viard I, Wehrli P, Bullani R et al. Inhibition of toxic epidermal necrolysis by block-
ade of CD95 with human intravenous immunoglobulin. Science.
1998;282:490–3.
Whitley RJ, Weiss H, Gnann JW Jr et al. Acyclovir with and without prednisone
for the treatment of herpes zoster. Ann Intern Med. 1996;125:376–83.
Summary Table
Primary
Lesion
Morphology
Diagnosis
Clinical Clues
Distribution
Figure
Folliculopapular
Acne
Presents in adolescence
Face, chest,
24-1
eruptions
Waxing and waning lesions
and back
Inflammatory papules, pustules,
comedones, and nodulocysts
Rosacea
Present in adults
Face
24-2
Telangiectasias and persistent centrofacial
erythema occasionally with inflammatory
red papules and papulopustules
Blistering
Herpes zoster
Closely grouped vesicles on an 
Single, unilateral 
24-3
disorders
erythematous base
dermatome
Over 2-3 days, the lesions become pustular
and then crust over after 7-10 days
Pain and paresthesias over involved
dermatome may precede the rash
Bullous
Presents as flaccid, transparent bullae that 
Intertriginous
24-4
impetigo
rupture easily and leave a rim of scale and 
areas
shallow moist erosion
Usually seen in children
Bullous
A cluster of large, tense blisters on 
Most common on 
24-6
arthropod bites
exposed skin 
the extremities
Bullous
Seen in elderly patients
Begin on the lower 
pemphigoid
Sudden onset of 1-2 cm tense blisters and 
extremities and 
bright, red, urticarial plaques 
progresses upward
24-7
Stevens-
Macular rash that subsequently blisters 
Begins on chest and 
24-8
Johnson
and then rapidly erodes
face and then spreads
syndrome
The skin is usually excruciatingly tender
Palms and soles 
often involved
Papulosquamous
Psoriasis
Well-demarcated erythematous plaques with 
Extensor surfaces,
24-9
eruptions
silvery, adherent scales 
umbilicus, and scalp 
(Trunk and proximal
extremities for
guttate psoriasis) 
Pityriasis
“Herald patch”progressing to small, oval,
rosea
scaly plaques in a “fir tree pattern”
Trunk
24-10
Tinea
Round, pink, plaques with small peripheral 
Anywhere
24-11
corporis
papules and an advancing scaling border
Nummular
Extremely pruritic rash of numerous, round,
Legs
24-12
dermatitis
crusted lesions
Secondary
Oval macules presenting diffusely, including 
Rash can be diffuse 
syphilis
palms and soles 
including palms 
A history of a transient, painless, genital ulcer
and soles
in the preceding weeks can often be obtained
Skin cancers
Basal cell
Flesh-colored, translucent, or slightly red papule
Head, neck, or other 
24-15
carcinoma
or nodule, classically displaying a rolled border 
sun-exposed skin
Squamous cell
Firm, but somewhat indistinct nodule or plaque
Sun-exposed skin
24-16
carcinoma 
Melanoma
Dark brown macule with pigment variation
Anywhere
24-17
and irregular borders
Purpura and
Petechiae 
Non-blanching, pinpoint, red spots
Dependent body 
petechiae
parts, most commonly 
the lower extremities
Purpura
Red, blue or purple macules, papules or plaques,
Anywhere
24-14
may or may not be palpable, up to several
centimeter in diameter
Plate 1. Ms. N. on initial presentation.
Plate 2. Rosacea (Photograph courtesy of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
Plate 3. Mr. B. on initial presentation.
Plate 4. Bullous impetigo.
Plate 5. Impetigo.
Plate 6. Bullous arthropod bites.
Plate 7. Bullous pemphigoid. (Photograph courtesy of Dr. Keith
Duffy.)
Plate 8. Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Plate 13. Urticaria.
Plate 9. Ms. M on initial presentation.
Plate 10. Pityriasis rosea.
Plate 11. Tinea corporis.
Plate 12. Nummular dermatitis.
Plate 16. Squamous cell carcinoma. (Photograph courtesy
of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
Plate 14. Purpura.
Plate 15. Basal cell carcinoma. (Photograph courtesy
of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
Plate 17. Malignant melanoma. (Photograph courtesy
of Dr. Anne E. Laumann.)
?
25
405
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. T is 77-year-old man with acute renal failure (ARF).
What is the differential diagnosis of ARF?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
ARF is defined as an abrupt decrease in glomerular filtration rate
(GFR), with a concomitant increase in serum creatinine, resulting
in an inability to maintain fluid and electrolyte balance. It occurs
over hours or days and can occur in the presence of previously nor-
mal renal function or in patients with chronic kidney disease
(CKD). There is no standard definition, and criteria commonly
used include an increase in serum creatinine of > 0.5 mg/dL, an
increase of more than 20% above baseline, or a decrease in GFR
of at least 50%.
The framework for the differential diagnosis is a combination
of anatomic and pathophysiologic:
A. Prerenal (due to renal hypoperfusion)
1. Hypovolemia
a. GI fluid loss
b. Renal loss
c. Hemorrhage
d. Third spacing
e. Decreased effective circulating volume
(1) Heart failure (HF)
(2) Cirrhosis
2. Hypotension
a. Sepsis
b. Cardiogenic shock
c. Anaphylaxis
d. Anesthesia- and medication-induced
e. Relative hypotension below patient’s autoregulatory level
3. Changes in renal hemodynamics
a. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)/
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 inhibitors
b. ACE inhibitors/angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs)
c. Renal artery thrombosis or embolism
d. Abdominal aortic aneurysm
B. Intrarenal
1. Vascular
a. Vasculitis
b. Malignant hypertension
c. Cholesterol emboli
d. Thrombotic microangiopathies 
(1) Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura 
(2) Hemolytic uremic syndrome 
(3) Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
2. Glomerular
a. Inflammatory
(1) Postinfectious glomerulonephritis (GN)
(2) Cryoglobulinemia
(3) Henoch-Schönlein purpura
(4) Systemic lupus erythematosus 
(5) Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody associated GN
(6) Anti-glomerular basement membrane disease
b. Thrombotic microangiopathies
3. Tubular injury (acute tubular necrosis [ATN])
a. Ischemic, due to prolonged renal hypoperfusion
b. Toxin induced 
(1) Medications (such as aminoglycosides)
(2) Radiocontrast media
(3) Heavy metals (cisplatinum)
(4) Intratubular pigments (myoglobin, hemoglobin),
crystals (uric acid, oxalate), or proteins (myeloma)
4. Interstitial
a. Acute interstitial nephritis
b. Bilateral pyelonephritis
c. Infiltration (lymphoma, sarcoidosis)
C. Postrenal
1. Mechanical
a. Ureteral (must be bilateral obstruction to cause ARF)
(1) Stones
(2) Tumors
(3) Hematoma
(4) Retroperitoneal adenopathy or fibrosis
b. Bladder neck
(1) Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) or prostate cancer
(2) Tumors
(3) Stones
I have a patient with acute renal failure.
How do I determine the cause?
c. Urethral
(1) Strictures
(2) Tumors
(3) Obstructed indwelling catheters
2. Neurogenic bladder
An algorithm outlining the diagnostic approach to acute renal
failure appears at the end of the chapter. 
Measuring Kidney Function
A. GFR 
1. Best overall measure of kidney function
2. Normal = 130 mL/min/1.73m2 in young men (120 mL/min/
1.73m2 in women)
3. Difficult to accurately measure in clinical practice
B. Creatinine
1. Generation determined by muscle mass and dietary intake
2. Level varies with age, sex, race or ethnic group, muscle
mass, diet, nutritional status
3. The relationship between creatinine and GFR varies
inversely and exponentially, so that relatively small
changes in serum creatinine may reflect significant
decreases in GFR (Figure 25–1).
C. Creatinine clearance
1. Creatinine is filtered by glomeruli and secreted by
proximal tubule, so creatinine clearance exceeds GFR.
2. Must be calculated with a 24-hour urine collection, which
is inconvenient for patients and often incomplete.
D. Cystatin C
1. Freely filtered by glomerulus
2. Less variable than creatinine
3. Not yet in widespread use
E. Estimating GFR
1. Cockcroft-Gault formula (multiply by 0.85 for women): 
Ccr =
[(140 −age) × weight in kg]
72 × creatinine in mg/dL
a. Systematically overestimates GFR
b. Does not adjust for body surface area
2. Modification of Diet in Renal Disease Study Equation
(MDRD) study equation: 
GFR = 175 × (standardized creatinine)−1.154 × (age)−0.203
× 0.742 (if female) or × 1.212 (if African American)
a. Online calculator available: http://www.kidney.org/
professionals/kdoqi/gfr_calculator.cfm
b. Most accurate in nonhospitalized patients known to
have CKD
c. Less accurate in patients without kidney disease; values
> 60 mL/min/1.73m2 should be reported as “above 60”
rather than an exact number
d. Overall, more accurate and now more commonly used
than Cockcroft-Gault formula or 24-hour urine meas-
urement of creatinine clearance.
1
Mr. T felt well until last night, when he had a shaking chill
followed by a fever and the onset of a cough productive of
rusty colored sputum. His fever has persisted, his cough
has worsened, and he feels lethargic. His past medical
history is notable for well-controlled hypertension and
prostate cancer treated with radiation therapy 5 years
ago. His current medications are hydrochlorothiazide and
lisinopril. He smokes a few cigarettes a day and has 
406 /  CHAPTER 25
Figure 25–1. Relationship of serum creatinine level to measured GFR. (Reproduced, with permission, from 
Levey AS, Bosch JP, Lewis JB, Greene T, Rogers N, Roth D. A more accurate method to estimate glomerular 
filtration rate from serum creatinine: a new prediction equation. Ann Intern Med. 1999;130:461–470.)
0
0
2
4
Serum Creatinine (mg/dL)
6
8
10
20
40
60
Men
GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2)
80
100
120
Black men
White men
0
0
2
4
Serum Creatinine (mg/dL)
6
8
10
20
40
60
Women
GFR (mL/min/1.73 m2)
80
100
120
Black women
White women
A
B
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  407
1 drink per week. His physical exam shows temperature,
38.6°C; BP, 90/60 mm Hg; pulse, 110 bpm; RR, 24
breaths per minute. His mucous membranes appear dry.
Lung exam is notable for decreased breath sounds and
crackles at the right lung base.
One month ago, his creatinine was 1.4 mg/dL. Six
months ago, his PSA was 1.0. Laboratory test results
now include WBC, 16,000/mcL (70% PMNs, 20% bands,
10% lymphocytes); Hgb, 10.2 g/dL; Hct, 32%; MCV, 88
mcm3; Na, 140 mEq/L; K, 5.4 mEq/L; Cl, 100 mEq/L; HCO3
19 mEq/L; BUN, 40 mg/dL; creatinine, 3.8 mg/dL; glucose,
102 mg/dL.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Although one etiology may be more likely than the
others based on the presentation, the initial testing
is generally the same for every patient with ARF.
The pivotal point in this patient’s presentation is the hypotension,
due to hypovolemia, sepsis (presumably pneumococcal based on
his classic presentation), or both. Transient hypovolemia or
hypotension causes prerenal azotemia, but prolonged hypotension
leads to renal ischemia. It is likely he has been hypotensive long
enough to have developed renal ischemia and consequent ATN.
His history of CKD (baseline creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL), age, and
chronic hypertension increase his risk of developing ATN when-
ever his renal blood flow is reduced. Nevertheless, it is necessary to
make sure he does not also have a component of prerenal ARF due
to volume depletion. Finally, despite his normal PSA a few
months ago, he could have obstruction from BPH or recurrent
prostate cancer. Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis, an
intrarenal cause of ARF, is not a consideration since that occurs
after group A hemolytic streptococcal infections, not after pneu-
mococcal infections. Table 25–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
Because hypovolemia and obstruction are such
treatable causes of ARF, they are always “must not
miss” diagnoses.
The evaluation of ARF always begins with urine
electrolytes and a urinalysis.
1
Mr. T receives 1 L of normal saline, with no change in his BP.
Urine is obtained prior to the fluid bolus and results include
urine sodium, 40 mEq/h; urine chloride, 57 mEq/mL; urine
creatinine, 45 mg/24 h, and urine urea nitrogen 250 g/24 h;
urinalysis showed specific gravity, 1.010; leukocyte esterase,
negative; glucose, negative; blood, negative; protein, trace;
RBC, 1–2/hpf; WBC, 1–2/hpf; positive granular casts.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: ATN
ATN is not synonymous with ARF; it is 1 cause of ARF.
Textbook Presentation
The presentation ranges from asymptomatic (with discovery of an
increased creatinine on routine laboratory testing) to symptoms of
uremia (eg, lethargy, nausea, delirium, seizures, edema, and dyspnea).
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology
1. Ischemia due to renal hypoperfusion prolonged enough to
cause tubular cell damage
a. Due to autoregulation, patients with normal kidneys
and normal renal arteries can maintain normal renal
blood flow and GFR with mean arterial pressures as low
as 80 mm Hg.
b. When renal artery pressure decreases, there is a
prostaglandin-mediated drop in afferent arteriolar resist-
ance and an angiotensin II–mediated increase in efferent
arteriolar resistance; these changes maintain glomerular
capillary pressure and GFR.
c. If renal artery pressure drops below the autoregulatory
range, endogenous vasoconstrictors cause an increase
Table 25–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr.T.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
ATN
Hypotension from
FENa
any cause
Urinalysis
Exposure to toxins
(especially
radiocontrast media,
aminoglycosides)
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Hypovolemia
Orthostatic
BUN/creatinine 
hypotension
ratio
Sunken eyes
FENa, FEurea
Dry axilla
History of vomiting
or diarrhea
Elderly
Obstruction
Incontinence
Ultrasound
Dribbling
Pelvic discomfort
408 /  CHAPTER 25
in afferent arteriolar resistance, leading to reduced
glomerular capillary pressure and GFR.
d. Despite decreased perfusion, tubules remain intact
initially; however, with prolonged ischemia, there is
tubular injury and death.
e. Patients with the conditions or exposures listed in
Table 25–2, all of which impair autoregulation, are at
higher risk for developing ATN.
2. Toxin exposure (radiocontrast media, aminoglycosides,
amphotericin B, cisplatin, Hgb, myoglobin, crystals,
myeloma proteins)
B. Epidemiology and prognosis
1. ATN accounts for 55–60% of ARF in hospitalized
patients and for 11% in outpatients.
2. Postoperative ATN and contrast-induced nephropathy
(CIN) are the most common causes.
3. Can be oliguric (urinary output < 400 mL/d) or nonoliguric.
4. Mortality in hospitalized patients with ATN is about
37%; in ICU patients, mortality is about 78%.
5. Risk factors for increased mortality include 
a. Male sex 
b. Advanced age 
c. Comorbid illness
d. Malignancy 
e. Oliguria 
f. Sepsis 
g. Mechanical ventilation 
h. Multiorgan failure 
i. Severity of illness
6. Full renal recovery generally occurs over 1–2 weeks in
about 60% of survivors; a “post ATN diuresis,” during
which urinary output transiently increases, may be
seen.
7. Overall, 5–10% of patients with ATN require long-term
dialysis; 33% of patients in whom ATN develops in the
ICU and who survive require dialysis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
Urine electrolytes, urinalysis, and serum BUN and
creatinine are used to distinguish ATN from prere-
nal states; ultrasound is used to distinguish ATN
from obstruction.
A. Urine sodium
1. Hypoperfusion causes increased reabsorption of sodium,
water, and urea by the tubules; if prolonged ischemia leads
to tubular damage, the tubules can no longer increase
reabsorption, leading to urinary sodium loss.
2. Consequently, there should be little sodium in the urine in
prerenal ARF, whether measured by the amount of sodium
in a spot urine sample, or by the fractional excretion of
sodium (FENa).
3.
4. The test characteristics of urine sodium, FEurea, and FENa
are shown in Table 25–3.
5. When are the urine sodium and FENa misleading?
a. Urine sodium and FENa will be high if the patient is
taking diuretics or has received intravenous saline prior
to collection of the urine sample, even if the patient is
prerenal.
b. Urine sodium and FENa can be low in ATN due to
rhabdomyolysis, myoglobinuria, hemolysis, sepsis,
cirrhosis, HF, and CIN.
FENa is a better test than urine sodium for distin-
guishing prerenal states from ATN.
B. Fraction excretion of urea nitrogen (FEurea)
1.
2. In well-hydrated individuals, the FEurea is 50–65%.
3. In prerenal ARF, the FEurea < 35%; in ATN, it is > 50%.
4. The FEurea is not affected by diuretic use.
5. In patients taking diuretics, the sensitivity of FEurea < 35%
for prerenal ARF is 89%, while the sensitivity of FENa
drops to 48%.
The FEurea is the best urine index to diagnose prer-
enal ARF in patients taking diuretics.
C. Other urine tests
1. Classically, muddy brown granular casts and renal tubular
cells are seen in ATN; the sensitivity and specificity of
these findings are unknown.
FENa =
urine Na/plasma Na
× 100%
urine creatinine/plasma creatinine
= urine Na × plasma creatinine × 100%
Plasma Na × urine creatinine 
FEurea = urine urea nitrogen/blood urea nitrogen × 100%
urine creatinine/plasma creatinine
= urine urea nitrogen × plasma creatinine × 100%
blood urea nitrogen × urine creatinine
Table 25–2. Factors affecting autoregulation of
glomerular pressure and glomerular filtration rate.
Inability to 
Inability to increase  
decrease afferent
efferent arteriolar
Vascular 
arteriolar resistance
resistance
obstruction
Older age
ACE inhibitors
Renal artery 
Atherosclerosis
Angiotensin receptor 
stenosis
Chronic hypertension
blockers 
Chronic kidney disease
Malignant hypertension
NSAIDs/COX-2 inhibitors
Sepsis
Hypercalcemia
Cyclosporine/tacrolimus
Renal artery stenosis
COX, cyclooxygenase; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  409
2. Specific gravity >1.015 and urine osmolality >400
mOsm/kg are associated with prerenal states.
a. Osmolality can be falsely low in prerenal states because
of impairment of concentrating ability from underly-
ing chronic renal disease, an osmotic diuresis, use of
diuretics, or diabetes insipidus.
b. Sensitivity and specificity of these findings are unknown.
D. BUN/creatinine ratio
1. Classically, > 20:1 in prerenal states due to reabsorption of
urea with sodium
2. Can also be elevated with GI bleeding, use of corticos-
teroids, intake of a high-protein diet, or increased catabo-
lism (postoperative or infection)
3. Can be low with ARF secondary to rhabdomyolysis, or
with decreased production due to malnutrition or liver
disease
E. Physical exam
1. See Chapter 26, Syncope, for a discussion of measuring
orthostatic vital signs and their usefulness in assessing
acute blood loss.
2. The ability of the physical exam to diagnosis hypovolemia
is not well studied. Available data show:
a. Orthostatic vital signs: pulse increment > 30 bpm and
systolic BP decline > 20 mm Hg have moderate speci-
ficity (75% for pulse, 81% for BP) but poor sensitivity
(43% for pulse, 29% for BP); LR+ and LR−are both ~1.
b. Sunken eyes (LR+ = 3.4) and dry axilla (LR+ = 2.8) are
the best predictors of hypovolemia, but absence of
these findings does not rule out hypovolemia.
c. Dry mucous membranes of mouth is not that helpful
in ruling in hypovolemia (LR+ = 2) but has the best
LR−(LR– = 0.3).
d. One study suggests that a combination of findings
(eg, confusion, nonfluent speech, dry mucous mem-
branes, dry/furrowed tongue, extremity weakness, and
sunken eyes) is highly predictive of hypovolemia.
Treatment 
A. Normalize intravascular volume.
B. Ensure mean arterial pressure (MAP) is > 70 mm Hg.
1. MAP = 1/3 systolic BP + 2/3 diastolic BP 
2. Elderly patients may need MAP > 80–90 mm Hg
C. Obtain renal consultation within 48 hours.
D. Avoid CIN
1. Main risk factors for CIN are estimated GFR <50
mL/min/1.73m2, diabetes, hypovolemia
2. Other risk factors include age over 75, HF, cirrhosis, hyper-
tension, proteinuria, concomitant use of NSAIDs, intra-
arterial injection of contrast, and high doses of contrast
3. Serum creatinine levels peak at 3 days postexposure and
usually return to baseline within 10 days.
4. It is not clear how to best prevent CIN
a. The lowest dose of contrast possible should be used.
b. Low osmolar contrast agents may be better.
c. Hydration with IV 0.9 normal saline may be preven-
tive; the optimal duration of hydration is not clear.
d. Although N-acetylcysteine and IV sodium bicarbonate
are sometimes used, the data demonstrating efficacy
are inconsistent.
E. Adjust doses of drugs for renal impairment as necessary.
F. Optimize nutritional support.
G. No evidence to support the use of loop diuretics, such as
furosemide, or low-dose dopamine; both may actually be harmful.
H. Indications for acute dialysis
1. Hyperkalemia
2. Volume overload
3. Metabolic acidosis refractory to medical therapy
4. Uremic pericarditis or encephalopathy
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. T’s FENa is 2.41%, and his FEurea is 53%. He is treated
with IV antibiotics and fluids, with normalization of his
BP. A repeat creatinine, done several hours later, is again
3.8 mg/dL.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, ATN? Have you ruled out
the active alternatives? Do other tests need to
be done to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
The combination of sepsis, a FEurea > 50%, a bland urinalysis, and
a lack of exposure to other toxins makes hypotension-induced
Table 25–3. Urinary sodium and urea nitrogen test characteristics.
Test Characteristics of Classic Prerenal 
Test
Classic Pattern
Patterns in Patients not Taking Diuretics
Prerenal
ATN
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Urine sodium
< 20 mEq/L
> 20 mEq/L
90%
82%
5
0.12
FENa
< 1%
> 2%
96%
95%
19
0.04
FEurea
< 35%
> 50%
90%
96%
22.5
0.1
ATN, acute tubular necrosis.
410 /  CHAPTER 25
ATN the most likely diagnosis. You would not expect his creati-
nine to improve after just a few hours of normotension, so the
repeat creatinine of 3.8 mg/dL is not necessarily alarming. How-
ever, it is not possible to rule out obstruction based on the infor-
mation available so far, so it is necessary to do a renal ultrasound.
(ARF due to obstruction will be discussed later in the chapter.)
Exclude urinary tract obstruction in all patients
with ARF.
CASE RESOLUTION
1
The ultrasound shows normal kidneys, with no
hydronephrosis. Mr. T’s BP remains stable, and at discharge 
1 week later, his creatinine is 2.0 mg/dL. He returns to
see you 2 weeks later, reporting that his osteoarthritis
“flared” after so much time in bed, and he has been using
celecoxib for relief. His creatinine is 2.5 mg/dL. You advise
him to stop the celecoxib, and a repeat creatinine 2 weeks
later is 1.5 mg/dL.
NSAIDs, even selective COX-2 inhibitors, can decrease renal
perfusion due to prostaglandin inhibition, leading to a prerenal
ARF. Patients with abnormal renal function are at the highest
risk for this complication, and such medications should be
avoided. Renal function usually returns to baseline after stop-
ping the drug.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mr. K is an 80-year-old man brought in by his family
with the chief complaint of malaise, anorexia, and con-
fusion for the past 3 days. He is generally healthy and
independent, and he had been feeling fine, except for a
cold several days ago. Over the last 3 days, his family
noticed that he has seemed tired and a little confused.
He has been drinking liquids but not eating much. They
also report that he has had a couple of episodes of uri-
nary incontinence, something he has never experienced
before. His past medical history is notable only for
osteoarthritis, for which he takes either acetamino-
phen or ibuprofen. On physical exam, he is alert and
cooperative. His BP is 160/80 mm Hg, pulse is 88 bpm,
RR is 16 breaths per minute, and he is afebrile. There is
no adenopathy, lungs are clear, and cardiac exam is
normal. Abdominal exam shows no masses or tender-
ness. His prostate is mildly enlarged, without nodules.
There is no peripheral edema.
Initial laboratory test results include Na, 138 mEq/L;
K 4.8, mEq/L; Cl, 100 mEq/L; HCO3, 20 mEq/L; BUN, 90
mg/dL; creatinine, 7.2 mg/dL.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
All 3 etiologies of ARF need to be considered. His age, prostatic
enlargement, and urinary incontinence are all pivotal points
suggesting urinary tract obstruction. However, he also could have
prerenal ARF from either NSAID use or intravascular volume
depletion. He has no history suggesting a specific intrarenal cause,
so intrarenal causes would be considered only if no postrenal or
prerenal cause could be identified. Table 25–4 lists the differential
diagnosis.
Table 25–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. K.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Obstruction
Nocturia
Catheterization
Incontinence
Postvoid residual
Dribbling
Ultrasound 
Slow stream
Abdominal/pelvic
discomfort
Palpable bladder
Active Alternative—Most Common
NSAID use
Medication history,
FENa
including over-the-
Stopping 
counter medications
medication
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Hypovolemia
Orthostatic
FENa
hypotension
BUN/creatinine 
Sunken eyes
ratio
Dry axilla
Fluid challenge
History of vomiting
or diarrhea
Elderly
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  411
2
Mr. K’s urine sodium is 20 mEq/h, with a FENa of 1%. He is
given 500 mL of 0.9% saline intravenously. A couple of
hours later, his creatinine is 7.0 mg/dL, and he reports
lower abdominal pain. He has had several episodes of
dribbling urine since receiving the IV fluids.
Catheterization can be a diagnostic test in ARF.
2
After he urinates, a Foley catheter is placed and 500 mL
of urine quickly fills the bag.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Urinary
Tract Obstruction
Textbook Presentation
Symptoms vary with site, degree, and rapidity of onset of the
obstruction, ranging from severe pain with acute obstruction to
mild or no pain. Incontinence and dribbling are common.
Disease Highlights
A. Clinical manifestations
1. Upper ureteral or renal pelvic lesions can cause flank pain;
lower obstruction can cause pelvic pain that sometimes
radiates to the ipsilateral testicle or labium.
2. Obstruction must be bilateral to cause renal failure; the
most common cause is prostatic enlargement.
3. Urinary output
a. Anuria, if obstruction is complete
(1) Anuria is defined as < 100 mL of urine per day.
(2) Also seen in shock, vascular lesions, severe ATN,
or severe glomerulonephritis.
b. Output can be normal or increased with partial obstruction.
c. Increased output is due to tubular injury that impairs
concentrating ability and sodium reabsorption.
d. Incontinence, dribbling, decreased output, and hema-
turia may be present.
B. Obstruction accounts for 17% of cases of outpatient ARF,
and for 2–5% of cases of inpatient ARF; obstruction is more
commonly seen in men than women.
C. Patients can have type 4 renal tubular acidosis with hyper-
kalemia due to tubular injury.
D. In patients with normal kidneys, unilateral obstruction often
is undetected because the unobstructed kidney compensates
enough to maintain normal renal function.
E. Prognosis
1. Complete recovery of renal function occurs if total ureteral
obstruction is relieved within 7 days; little or no recovery
occurs if the total obstruction is present for 12 weeks.
a. Complete or prolonged partial obstruction can lead to
tubular atrophy and irreversible loss of renal function.
b. Obstruction is a rare cause of end-stage renal disease.
2. Prognosis of partial obstruction is unpredictable.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Urine electrolytes are not very helpful.
B. Postvoid residual is normally < 100 mL; it will be increased
only if obstruction is distal to the ureters.
C. Renal ultrasound
1. The best first test to look for obstruction.
2. Has a sensitivity of 80–85% for detecting postrenal ARF,
defined as finding dilatation of the collecting system and
the site of the obstruction.
3. There are 4 settings in which obstruction can occur with-
out dilatation of the complete collecting system.
a. Within the first 1–3 days, due to relative lack of com-
pliance of collecting system
b. When the patient is also volume depleted; sometimes
repeating an ultrasound after hydration will demon-
strate the dilatation
c. With retroperitoneal fibrosis, which can cause hydronephro-
sis without ureteral dilatation; the hydronephrosis and
fibrosis are better seen on CT scan
d. With obstruction so mild that there is no impairment
in renal function
4. Duplex ultrasound can identify unilateral obstruction
early by detecting an increased resistive index compared
with the other kidney; however, it cannot be used to diag-
nose bilateral obstruction.
D. CT scan can detect sites of obstruction missed on ultrasound.
E. Intravenous pyelography
1. Used if site of obstruction cannot be seen on ultrasound
or CT
2. Especially useful for identifying papillary necrosis or cal-
iceal blunting from previous infection
Treatment 
A. Relieve the obstruction immediately.
1. Modalities
a. Foley catheter for bladder neck obstruction
Remember that indwelling catheters can be obstructed
by clots.
b. Suprapubic catheter, if Foley is not possible
c. Percutaneous nephrostomy tubes for ureteral obstruction
2. Consequences
a. Rapid decompression of the bladder can rarely lead to
hematuria and even hypotension
412 /  CHAPTER 25
b. Will often see a postobstructive diuresis; ie, an initial
urinary output of 500–1000 mL/h
(1) Represents an attempt to excrete fluid retained
during the period of obstruction
(2) Not necessary to replace entire urinary output;
doing so will increase the diuresis
(3) Should treat with normal replacement fluids
(4) Should monitor electrolytes closely and replace as
needed
B. Correct the underlying cause of the obstruction.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
A renal ultrasound shows bilateral ureteral dilatation
and hydronephrosis, confirming the diagnosis of urinary
tract obstruction. He is admitted to the hospital, and
over several days, his creatinine returns to baseline of
1.5 mg/dL. The catheter is removed, and he urinates with
his usual mild difficulty starting the stream. Several
days after discharge, he arrives in the emergency depart-
ment, reporting that he cannot urinate at all. As
instructed, he has avoided all NSAID use but has been
taking pseudoephedrine for cold symptoms.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for the
leading hypothesis, urinary tract obstruction?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives? Do
other tests need to be done to exclude the
alternative diagnoses?
No further tests are necessary to diagnose the cause of his ARF;
however, it is important to determine the cause of the urinary tract
obstruction, and that of his new, related problem, acute urinary
retention.
Related Diagnoses: Acute Urinary Retention
and BPH
1. Acute Urinary Retention 
Acute urinary retention is most commonly seen in older men with
prostatic hypertrophy causing bladder neck obstruction (seen in
10% of men in their 70s and up to 33% of men in their 80s). The
risk is increased for older men, for those with moderate to severe
lower urinary tract symptoms, for those with a flow rate < 12
mL/sec, and for those with a prostate volume > 30 mL by tran-
srectal ultrasound.
In women, acute urinary retention is usually due to neurogenic
bladder, and in younger patients, it is usually due to neurologic
disease. Medications that commonly induce urinary retention in
susceptible patients include antihistamines, anticholinergics, anti-
spasmodics, tricyclic antidepressants, opioids, and α-adrenergic
agonists.
2. BPH
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is urinary frequency, nocturia, reduced
stream, and dribbling at the end of urination in an older man.
Disease Highlights
A. Defined as microscopic (histologic evidence of cellular prolif-
eration), macroscopic (actual enlargement of the prostate), or
clinical (symptoms resulting from macroscopic BPH)
B. Two-thirds of the adult prostate is glandular and one-third is
fibromuscular.
1. Intraprostatic dihydrotestosterone (DHT), synthesized
from testosterone by 5-α-reductase type 2, controls glan-
dular growth.
2. The smooth muscle of the prostate, urethra, and bladder
are under α1-adrenergic control.
C. Prostatic enlargement causes symptoms due to compression
of the periurethral area and of the bladder; the compression
occurs because of the physical enlargement of the prostate and
also because of increased muscle tone in the urethra, prostatic
fibromuscular tissue, and bladder neck.
D. Symptoms can be categorized as 
1. Storage symptoms (urgency frequency, nocturia, urge
incontinence, stress incontinence) 
2. Voiding symptoms (hesitancy, poor flow, straining, dysuria) 
3. Postmicturition symptoms (dribbling, incomplete emptying)
E. Prostate size does not correlate with symptom severity.
1. Prostate growth is 0.4 mL/year in younger men; 1.2 mL/year
in older men.
2. However, men with prostates > 30 mL, and especially
> 40 mL, are more likely to have symptoms.
3. Can use International Prostate Symptom Score to assess
severity of symptoms and assess response to therapy.
a. There are 7 questions to be answered on a 0 to 5 scale,
yielding a potential total of 35 points (Table 25–5).
b. 0–7 = mild BPH; 8–19 = moderate BPH; 20–35 =
severe BPH
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Guidelines recommend all patients have a digital rectal exam,
urinalysis, and serum creatinine; other testing (urodynamics,
imaging) is optional.
B. A prostate specific antigen (PSA) should be checked in those
men who would consider treatment for prostate cancer.
C. Urinary flow rates, urodynamic measurements, and amount
of postvoid residual do not correlate well with symptoms.
D. Digital rectal exam
1. Cannot ascertain anterior or posterior extension or feel
entire posterior surface.
2. Therefore, prostate size is underestimated by 25–55% on
digital rectal exam, compared with transrectal ultrasound;
the underestimation increases the larger the prostate volume.
The prostate is even bigger than you think it is on
digital rectal exam.
Treatment
A. α-Blockers (terazosin, doxazosin, alfuzosin, tamsulosin)
1. Decrease muscle tone in the stroma and prostatic capsule
2. Provide the most rapid relief of lower urinary tract symptoms
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  413
B. 5-α-reductase inhibitors (finasteride, dutasteride)
1. Reduce prostate size by blocking conversion of testos-
terone to DHT.
2. Finasteride has been shown to reduce symptoms when the
prostate is > 40 mL.
a. Slow onset of action: weeks to months
b. Might also reduce risk of acute urinary retention and
need for surgery.
c. Should check PSA prior to starting finasteride, at 6 months,
and at 18 months; it should decrease by about 50%.
C. There is some evidence that combination therapy with
α-blockers and finasteride may be more effective than α-
blockers alone.
D. Indications for surgical intervention include moderate to severe
symptoms not responsive to medical therapy, acute urinary
retention, recurrent infections or hematuria, and azotemia.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
He is catheterized, and 500 mL of urine is obtained.
Because the urinary retention was precipitated by the
use of an α-adrenergic agent (pseudoephedrine), he is
given tamsulosin and the catheter is removed on a trial
basis. He is again unable to urinate. He then undergoes
transurethral resection of the prostate (TURP) with res-
olution of his urinary symptoms. His creatinine stays at
1.5 mg/dL throughout these events.
Table 25–5. International Prostate Symptom Score.
< Than Half 
About Half 
> Half the 
Almost 
Not at All
< 1 Time in 5
the Time
the Time
Time
Always
Over the past month, how often . . .
have you had a sensation of not emptying your 
0
1
2
3
4
5
bladder completely after you finished urinating?
have you had to urinate again less than 
0
1
2
3
4
5
2 hours after you finished urinating?
have you found you stopped and started again 
0
1
2
3
4
5
several times when you urinated?
have you found it difficult to postpone urination?
0
1
2
3
4
5
have you had a weak urinary stream?
0
1
2
3
4
5
have you had to push or strain to begin urination?
0
1
2
3
4
5
did you most typically get up to urinate from the time 
0
1
2
3
4
5
you went to bed at night until the time you
got up in the morning?
Scoring Key: 0-7, mild; 8-19 moderate; 20-35, severe.
Modified, with permission, from Barry MJ et al. The American Urological Association symptoms index for benign prostatic hyperplasia. J Urol. 1992;148:1549.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Mrs. F is a 63-year-old woman with a history of diastolic
dysfunction, hypertension, and osteoarthritis. Her usual
medications are atenolol, lisinopril, and acetaminophen,
and her usual serum creatinine is 1.5 mg/dL. Three weeks
ago, she came to see you reporting severe pain, erythema,
and swelling of her right first metatarsophalangeal joint. 
You diagnosed gout, and prescribed indomethacin 25 mg
3 times daily to use until the gout resolved. She returned for
follow-up yesterday, reporting that the gout had resolved in
a few days, but that she kept taking the indomethacin
because it helped her arthritis so much. Despite your reser-
vations, you agree to refill the prescription because she
clearly feels so much better than usual. Today you receive
the results of the blood tests you ordered during the visit:
Na, 141 mEq/24 h; K, 5.0 mEq/24 h; Cl, 100 mEq/24 h; HCO3,
20 mEq/L; BUN, 32 mg/dL; creatinine, 2.5 mg/dL.
414 /  CHAPTER 25
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
At this point, the differential for her new renal insufficiency is
quite broad, but it is logical to focus on the pivotal point in this
case, the recent use of indomethacin. Through prostaglandin inhi-
bition, NSAIDs can cause decreased renal blood flow, leading to a
prerenal state. NSAIDs are also 1 of the classes of drugs most com-
monly associated with an intrarenal disease, interstitial nephritis.
Although obstruction must always be considered, she is having no
urinary symptoms and has no risk factors. Table 25–6 lists the dif-
ferential diagnosis.
3
Mrs. F’s urine sodium is 35 mEq/h, and the FENa is 1.5%.
Urinalysis shows 1+ protein, 3 RBCs/hpf, 5–10 WBCs/hpf,
and no casts.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Diagnosis: NSAID-Induced
Renal Hypoperfusion
Textbook Presentation
ARF caused by NSAIDs is usually asymptomatic and is most com-
monly detected by finding an increased serum creatinine.
Disease Highlights
A. Can occur with nonselective NSAIDs and COX-2 inhibitors.
B. Seen within 3–7 days of starting therapy.
C. Renal prostaglandins are not important regulators of blood
flow in normal kidneys.
D. As discussed in the first case, prostaglandins are important in
the autoregulation of glomerular pressure and GFR.
E. Patients with CKD, hypertension, volume depletion, HF, and
cirrhosis already have impaired autoregulation.
F. Prostaglandin inhibition in such patients can lead to signifi-
cant decreases in renal blood flow, consequent reversible renal
ischemia, and ARF.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. FENa should be < 1%. (Sensitivity and specificity are unknown.)
B. Should reverse when the drug is stopped.
Treatment
Stop the exposure.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
You call Mrs. F and tell her to stop taking the indomethacin.
One week later, her creatinine is still 2.5 mg/dL. Urine
eosinophils are negative.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, NSAID-induced renal
hypoperfusion? Have you ruled out the active
alternatives? Do other tests need to be done
to exclude the alternative diagnoses?
Mrs. F’s FENa is higher than expected for NSAID-induced renal
hypoperfusion. She has not used diuretics or received IV fluids,
both of which can cause a falsely elevated urine sodium and FENa.
In addition, her creatinine has not improved. Therefore, it is
unlikely that prostaglandin inhibition is the reason for her renal
insufficiency.
Alternative Diagnosis: Interstitial Nephritis
Textbook Presentation
Classic symptoms include renal insufficiency, hematuria, pyuria
with WBC casts, fever, and eosinophilia. The full syndrome is
rarely seen today since it occurs primarily with methicillin-
induced acute interstitial nephritis.
Disease Highlights
A. Interstitial nephritis is found in 2–3% of all renal biopsies,
and in up to 15% of patients who had a biopsy done for ARF.
B. Etiology
1. In 1 case series, 10% of cases were caused by infection,
85% of cases were caused by medications, and 4% of cases
were idiopathic.
2. Can be caused by many medications, including but not
limited to
a. Antibiotics—most commonly ampicillin, ciprofloxacin,
penicillin G, rifampin, sulfonamides
Table 25–6. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. F.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
NSAID-induced
Use of NSAIDs
FENa
renal hypoperfusion
History of renal 
Stopping the 
disease
medication
HF
Active Alternative
Interstitial nephritis
Flank pain
Stopping the
Hematuria
medication
Urine eosinophils
Renal biopsy
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  415
b. NSAIDs—most commonly fenoprofen, ibuprofen,
indomethacin, naproxen, aspirin, phenylbutazone,
piroxicam
c. COX-2 inhibitors
d. Diuretics—most commonly furosemide
e. Anticonvulsants—most commonly phenytoin
f. Cimetidine, omeprazole, allopurinol
3. Can be caused by viral infections (eg, cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, HIV, mumps,
and others), bacterial infections (staphylococci, streptococci,
Yersinia, Legionella, and others), other infections such as
mycobacteria, toxoplasmosis, syphilis
4. Can be seen in vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
and lymphoproliferative disorders
C. Clinical manifestations
1. Renal manifestations develop within 3 weeks in 80% of
patients, with an average delay of 10 days (range 1 day to
18 months; longer delays often seen with NSAIDs).
2. Symptoms develop more rapidly if patient is rechallenged
with the offending drug.
3. Clinical presentation is often incomplete.
a. The most suggestive presentation, a combination of
renal insufficiency, mild proteinuria, abnormal urinal-
ysis, normal BP, no edema, and flank pain, is seen in
< 25% of cases.
b. Hematuria (usually microscopic), pyuria, and flank
pain are each seen in about 50% of cases.
c. Extrarenal symptoms (fever, rash) are seen in < 50% of
cases (< 10% of cases of NSAID-induced interstitial
nephritis)
d. Proteinuria is more prominent in NSAID-induced
interstitial nephritis (often nephrotic range with
NSAIDs; otherwise, usually < 1 g/d)
e. Less than 20% of patients are oliguric.
The absence of fever, rash, eosinophilia, or
eosinophiluria does not rule out interstitial nephritis.
D. Prognosis
1. Most patients improve within 6–8 weeks and return to
baseline renal function.
2. Predictors of irreversible injury are diffuse infiltrates and
frequent granulomas on biopsy, intake of the offending
drug for longer than 1 month, delayed response to pred-
nisone, and persistent renal failure after 3 weeks.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Sensitivity of urine eosinophils is 67% and specificity is 83%
(LR+ = 3.9; LR−= 0.39).
B. FENa usually > 1%
C. Gallium scan
1. Substantial renal uptake in acute interstitial nephritis, but
also see uptake in glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis, and
other conditions
2. Sensitivity and specificity are not well defined.
3. No uptake with ATN, so possibly useful in distinguishing
ATN from acute interstitial nephritis
D. Renal biopsy is gold standard.
Treatment 
A. Stop exposure, if possible.
B. Corticosteroids are sometimes used, but there are no prospec-
tive randomized clinical trials.
1. Consider in patients whose renal function does not
improve within 1 week of stopping exposure, after biopsy
confirms diagnosis.
2. Consider empiric trial in patients who have worsening
renal function and suspected acute interstitial nephritis,
and who are poor candidates for biopsy.
3. NSAID-induced acute interstitial nephritis is less respon-
sive to corticosteroid therapy.
4. Should see improvement in 2–3 weeks.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
Her urinalysis is consistent with interstitial nephritis,
and the lack of urine eosinophils does not rule out the
diagnosis. Renal biopsy is performed, which shows inflam-
matory infiltrates in the interstitium. Her renal function
returns to baseline several weeks after the NSAIDs are
discontinued. She is cautioned to never use NSAIDs in
the future to avoid recurrent interstitial nephritis.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Acute Glomerulonephritis
Acute GN is caused by one of several disease processes, all of
which involve immunologically mediated proliferative GN. The
classic clinical “nephritic syndrome” consists of the acute onset of
hematuria (with red cell casts), proteinuria, elevated creatinine,
hypertension, and edema. In rapidly progressive GN (RPGN),
also called crescentic GN because of the “crescent” shaped changes
around the glomerulus, the nephritic syndrome develops subacutely,
over weeks to months (see Table 25-7).
Vascular Causes of ARF
Vascular events are serious, but rare, causes of ARF. There are
3 mechanisms of acute vascular compromise: renal artery throm-
bosis, thromboembolism of the renal arteries, and atheroembolism. 
1. Renal Artery Thrombosis
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is severe flank pain, hematuria, nausea,
vomiting, fever, and hypertension. 
Disease Highlights
A. Blunt trauma is most common cause.
B. Nontraumatic causes include
1. Dissecting aortic or renal artery aneurysms
416 /  CHAPTER 25
2. Vasculitis
3. Cocaine abuse
4. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Evidence-Based Diagnosis 
A. Angiogram is the gold standard.
B. Infused CT is often diagnostic.
Treatment
A. Nephrectomy, if renal infarction occurs
B. Revascularization or thrombolysis
C. Sometimes observation and medical management
2.Thromboembolism of the Renal Arteries
Textbook Presentation
Most patients have flank pain, often with hematuria or anuria.
Disease Highlights
A. Clinical features depend on severity and location of emboli.
B. Bilateral emboli or emboli to a solitary kidney more likely to
produce ARF and anuria.
C. 75% of patients have abdominal or flank pain.
D. Variably see nausea, vomiting, hematuria
E. Fever and hypertension are common, but fever is often delayed
until second or third day.
F. Sources of emboli
1. Cardiac: atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction, rheu-
matic valvular disease, prosthetic valves, subacute bacterial
endocarditis
2. Aortic or renal aneurysms
3. Intra-arterial catheterization
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnosed at onset of symptoms in only 30% of patients
B. Usually have leukocytosis, increased lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and transaminases; the LDH is increased more than
the transaminases.
C. Alkaline phosphatase elevated in 30–50% of patients.
D. Angiography is gold standard for diagnosis; infused CT can
be diagnostic.
Treatment
A. Unilateral embolism and normal contralateral kidney: strep-
tokinase and/or angioplasty, followed by anticoagulation; no
indication for surgery
B. Bilateral emboli, or embolus to solitary kidney: same as above,
but try surgical reconstruction if cannot restore blood flow
3. Atheroembolism
Textbook Presentation
The classic presentation is a white man over age 60 with hyper-
tension, smoking, and vascular disease in whom livedo reticularis
and acute or subacute renal failure develop after an inciting event.
Disease Highlights
A. Cholesterol crystal embolism from an atherosclerotic aorta
B. 3 syndromes: abrupt onset of renal failure after an inciting event
(such as angiography), subacute worsening of renal function a
few weeks after an event, and chronic renal impairment
Table 25–7. Causes of acute glomerulonephritis (GN).
Type
Serologic markers
Diseases
Highlights
Anti-GBM GN
100% anti-GBM ab +
Anti-GBM disease 
Incidence 0.5/million
80% ANCA(−)
Goodpasture syndrome 
Pulmonary symptoms usually predate GN
20% ANCA +
(GN plus pulmonary 
Diagnosed by renal biopsy
C3 normal
hemorrhage)
Treated with plasmapheresis, corticosteroids,
immunosuppressives
30% develop ESRD
Pauci-immune GN
> 90% ANCA +
Idiopathic crescentic GN
80% of patients with Wegener have renal disease
Anti-GBM (−) 
Microscopic polyangiitis (GN +
Treated with corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide
C3 normal
systemic vasculitis
ESRD develops in 15% 
Wegener (GN + vasculitis of
respiratory tract)
Immune Complex GN
C3 low
Idiopathic
Poststreptococcal GN
Anti-GBM (−)
Postinfectious
Most common postinfectious GN
ANCA (−)
Lupus nephritis
10-14 days after infection with nephritogenic 
ASO high (post strep only)
Cryoglobulinemia
strain group A β-hemolytic streptococci
Bacterial endocarditis
Supportive treatment only; residual renal 
impairment rare
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  417
C. Risk factors include male sex, age > 60, hypertension, smoking,
diabetes, vascular disease
D. Can occur spontaneously or after vascular surgery procedures,
angiograms (especially coronary angiograms), and with
anticoagulation
E. Incidence probably quite low (< 1–2%) but may be as high as
5-6% in high-risk patients
F. Clinical manifestations (from 5 case series)
1. Skin lesions (livedo reticularis) in 35–90%
2. GI symptoms in 8–30%
3. Eosinophilia in 22–73%
4. CNS involvement in 4–23%
5. Dialysis needed in 28–61%
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Renal or skin biopsy
B. Can sometimes be diagnosed on fundoscopic exam
Treatment
A. Best approach beyond supportive therapy unknown
B. Avoid anticoagulation
C. Consider aggressive lipid management
Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD)
Textbook Presentation
Patients are often asymptomatic, or may have nonspecific symp-
toms such as fatigue. Patients with kidney failure can present
with fluid overload, uremic symptoms (fatigue, nausea, delir-
ium), or manifestations of electrolyte abnormalities (such as
arrhythmias).
Disease Highlights
A. There are 5 stages of CKD. GFR is estimated using the MDRD
equation, and kidney damage is defined as an albumin/
creatinine ratio of > 17 mg/g in men or > 25 mg/g in women
on 2 separate measurements 3 months apart.
1. Stage 1: Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR
(> 90 mL/min/1.73m2)
2. Stage 2: Kidney damage with mild decrease in GFR
(60–89 mL/min/1.73m2)
3. Stage 3: Moderate decrease in GFR (30–59 mL/min/1.73m2)
4. Stage 4: Severe decrease in GFR (15–29 mL/min/1.73m2)
5. Stage 5: Kidney failure (GFR < 15 mL/min/1.73m2)
B. Risk factors for CKD
1. Clinical conditions: history of hypertension, diabetes,
autoimmune disease, systemic infections, urinary tract
infections, urinary stones, urinary tract obstruction, recov-
ery from ARF
2. Sociodemographic factors: older age (> 60 years), racial or
ethnic minority, family history of CKD, low birth weight,
low income or educational level
3. Exposure to nephrotoxic drugs or chemicals 
C. Epidemiology
1. 16.5% of the US population has stage 1, 2, or 3 CKD,
about one-third at each stage
2. 0.4% of the US population has stage 4 or 5 CKD
D. Etiologies of CKD
1. Diabetic nephropathy 
a. Largest single cause of kidney failure in the United States
b. Found in ~40 of dialysis patients
2. Nondiabetic kidney diseases 
a. Glomerular diseases (such as autoimmune, drug
induced); prevalence in dialysis patients ~18%
b. Vascular diseases (such as large vessel disease,
hypertensive nephrosclerosis); prevalence in dialy-
sis patients ~20%
c. Tubulointerstitial diseases (recurrent urinary tract
infection, drug toxicity); prevalence in dialysis
patients ~7%
d. Cystic kidney diseases; found in ~5% of dialysis patients
E. Evaluation
1. All patients should have an estimation of GFR (the
MDRD equation discussed above is the best estimation);
a random urine specimen for albumin-creatinine ratio; a
urinalysis including specific gravity, pH, and microscopic
examination for RBCs, WBCs, and casts; a renal ultra-
sound; and serum electrolytes
2. Selected patients will need further evaluation including
renal biopsy
F. Complications
1. Volume overload
2. Hyperkalemia
3. Metabolic acidosis
4. Hyperphosphatemia
5. Secondary hyperparathyroidism and renal osteodystrophy
6. Hypertension
7. Anemia
8. Hyperlipidemia
9. Uremic pericarditis
10. Uremic neuropathy
11. Uremic encephalopathy
Treatment
A. Identify and treat reversible causes of renal dysfunction such
as hypovolemia, urinary tract obstruction, administration of
nephrotoxic drugs
B. Prevent or slow the progression of disease using ACE
inhibitors or ARBs to reduce protein excretion; the addition
of other drugs is often necessary to reach the BP treatment
goal of < 130/80 mm Hg.
C. Treat the complications listed above (a full discussion is
beyond the scope of this chapter).
D. Optimize cardiovascular risk factors.
E. Refer patients with a GFR < 30 mL/min/1.73m2 to a nephrol-
ogist for comanagement of complications and discussion of
potential need for dialysis.
F. Adjust doses of medications that are excreted by the kidneys.
418 /  CHAPTER 25
REFERENCES
Abuelo JG. Normotensive ischemic acute renal failure. N Engl J Med.
2007;357:797–805.
Barrett BJ, Parfrey PS. Preventing nephropathy induced by contrast medium.
N Engl J Med. 2006;354:379–386.
Carvounis CP, Nisar S, Guro-Razuman S. Significance of the fractional excretion
of urea in the differential diagnosis of acute renal failure. Kidney Int.
2002;62:2223–29.
Hilton R. Acute renal failure. BMJ. 2006;333:786–90.
Levey AS, Coresh J, Balk E, et al. National Kidney Foundation guideline for
chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classification, and stratification. Ann
Intern Med. 2003;139:137–47.
Levy A, Samraj GP. Benign prostatic hyperplasia: when to ‘watch and wait,’ when
and how to treat. Cleve Clin J Med. 2007;74(suppl 3):S15–S20.
McGee S, Abernethy WB, Simel DL. Is this patient hypovolemic? JAMA.
1999;281:1022–29.
Singri N, Ahya SN, Levin ML. Acute renal failure. JAMA. 2003;289:747–51.
Stevens LA, Coresh J, Greene T, Levey AS. Assessing kidney function—measured
and estimated glomerular filtration rate. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:2473–83.
ACUTE RENAL FAILURE /  419
Acute renal failure
Check urinalysis;
urine Na, urine
creatinine, urine urea
Evaluate volume status
(vital signs, skin condition,
mental status)
Evaluate for obstruction
(older age, male sex,
anticholinergic medications,
anuria, incontinence,
dribbling)
Hypovolemic,
FENa < 1%,
FEUN < 35%
Obstructive
symptoms, risk
factors
Renal
ultrasound
Hydronephrosis
Intravenous
hydration
Creatinine
improves
Yes
Correct underlying
cause
ATN, acute tubular necrosis; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; HUS, hemolytic uremic syndrome;
NSAIDS, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PPIs, proton pump inhibitors; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Yes
No
Relieve
obstruction
Yes
Consider intrarenal
cause
No
Catheterize
patient
Postvoid
residual >
100 mL
Yes
Obtain renal
ultrasound,
determine cause
of obstruction, and
relieve obstruction
Yes
No
Stop NSAIDs and other
nephrotoxins
Consider
intrarenal
cause
No
Prolonged
hypotension, toxin
exposure?
NSAIDs,
antibiotics,
diuretics,
anticonvulsants,
PPIs ongoing
infection?
Consider ATN
Consider interstitial
nephritis
Nephritic
syndrome?
Consider
glomerulonephritis
No
No further work-up
necessary if
creatinine returns
to baseline
Vascular risk
factors, DIC, TTP,
HUS?
Consider macro-
or microvascular
cause
Diagnostic Approach: Acute Renal Failure
?
26
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. M is a 23-year-old medical student who had an
episode of syncope this morning after entering his
anatomy lab for the first time. He is quite alarmed (and
embarrassed).
What is the differential diagnosis of syncope?
How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Syncope is the abrupt, transient complete loss of consciousness
and postural tone. Syncope may be a warning sign that the patient
is at risk for sudden cardiac death; therefore, a careful evaluation
is critical to identify and treat patients with potentially life-
threatening etiologies of syncope. The differential diagnosis is eas-
ily remembered by considering the brain’s requirements to main-
tain consciousness. Derangement of any of these requirements
may result in syncope. Consciousness requires the following: 
1. Organized cortical electrical activity
2. Glucose
3. Oxygen
4. A functional delivery system to deliver oxygen and glucose.
This in turn requires open vascular conduits and an adequate BP.
By far, most causes of syncope result from hypotension.
Therefore, it is useful to look at the determinants of BP. 
BP = cardiac output (CO) × total peripheral resistance (TPR)
CO = stroke volume (SV) × heart rate (HR)
Simple substitution: BP = SV × HR × TPR
SV = end-diastolic volume (EDV) – end-systolic volume (ESV)
Simple substitution: BP = (EDV – ESV) × HR × TPR
In summary, the differential diagnosis of syncope can be
remembered by considering the requirements for consciousness
(ie, BP [determined by EDV, ESV, HR, TPR], organized cortical
electrical activity, glucose, oxygen, and open vascular conduits).
Differential Diagnosis of Syncope
A. BP = (EDV −ESV) × HR × TPR
1. Inadequate EDV (poor filling)
a. Dehydration
b. Hemorrhage
c. Pulmonary embolism (PE)
d. Cardiac tamponade
2. Elevated ESV (inadequate emptying)
a. Aortic stenosis (AS)
b. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
3. Heart rate disorders
a. Tachycardias
(1) Ventricular tachycardia (VT)
(2) Supraventricular tachycardia associated with acces-
sory pathway (Wolff-Parkinson-White [WPW]
syndrome)
b. Bradycardias
(1) Neurally mediated syncope (cardio-inhibitory
type)
(a) Neurocardiogenic syncope 
(b) Situational syncope
(c) Carotid sinus syndrome
(2) Sinus node disorders
(a) Sinus bradycardia (< 35 beats per minute)
(b) Sinus pauses (> 3 seconds or > 2 seconds with
symptoms)
(3) Atrioventricular (AV) block (second- or third-
degree)
4. Decreased TPR (vasodilatation)
a. Neurocardiogenic syncope (vasodepressor type)
b. Drugs (α-blockers, vasodilators, nitrates, tricyclic anti-
depressants, and phenothiazines)
c. Hypersensitive carotid (vasodepressor type)
d. Sepsis (usually causes protracted hypotension rather
than syncope)
e. Addison disease (usually causes protracted hypotension
rather than syncope)
B. Disorganized electrical activity: Generalized seizures
C. Hypoglycemia
1. Iatrogenic (eg, insulin and sulfonylureas)
2. Insulinomas (exceedingly rare)
D. Hypoxemia (usually results in impaired consciousness or
coma rather than syncope)
E. Obstructed vascular conduits
1. Vertebrobasilar insufficiency
2. Subclavian steal
I have a patient with syncope.
How do I determine the cause?
420
SYNCOPE /  421
1
Mr. M reports that he was in his usual state of health
and felt perfectly well prior to entering the anatomy dis-
section room. Upon viewing the cadaver, he felt queasy
and warm. He became diaphoretic and collapsed to the
floor. When he regained consciousness, he was not con-
fused. The instructor told him that he was unconscious
for only a few seconds. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The evaluation of all syncopal patients must include a thorough
history, physical exam, and ECG. A detailed history of the event
is critical (including what the patient was doing and feeling).
Pivotal clues include any findings on history or physical exam
that suggest cardiac disease, since patients with syncope and heart
disease are at a markedly increased risk for VT and sudden death.
Such clues include a history of coronary artery disease (CAD),
structural heart disease, heart failure (HF), syncope during exer-
tion, a family history of sudden cardiac death, advanced age, or
significant murmurs. Other pivotal clues may suggest alternate
hypotheses such as neurocardiogenic syncope, seizures, hypo-
glycemia, PE, or significant valvular disease (see Figures 26–7,
26–8). The physical exam should evaluate vital signs and ortho-
static BPs in addition to a thorough cardiac and neurologic exam.
Finally, the ECG is scrutinized to look for signs of ischemia,
hypertrophy, AV block, bundle-branch block (BBB), or other
abnormalities (see below). 
Mr. M’s history is classic for neurocardiogenic syncope. Neu-
rocardiogenic syncope is often precipitated by a highly emotional
event or painful stimulus. Patients may experience nausea,
diaphoresis, and then brief syncope with a rapid return to normal
consciousness. It is also important to consider other common
causes of syncope such as dehydration or medications. “Must not
miss” diagnoses include cardiac syncope or seizures. In young
patients the most common “must not miss” form of cardiac syn-
cope is hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Table 26–1 lists the differ-
ential diagnosis.
1
Mr. M reports no diarrhea or vomiting, and he is not tak-
ing any medications. He has no known heart disease and
exercises vigorously without symptoms. There is no fam-
ily history of sudden cardiac death. There is no history of
confusion following the syncope, tonic-clonic activity, or
incontinence. On physical exam, his BP and pulse are nor-
mal and do not change with standing. Cardiac exam
reveals a regular rate and rhythm without a significant
murmur, JVD, or S3 gallop. His ECG is normal.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Neurocardiogenic
(Vasovagal) Syncope
Textbook Presentation
Neurocardiogenic syncope typically develops in young patients
during prolonged standing at times precipitated by pain or anxi-
ety (ie, phlebotomy). Lightheadedness, nausea, and diaphoresis
may precede syncope, which is brief.
Disease Highlights
A. Most common cause of syncope (20–33% of cases)
B. Pathophysiology (Figure 26–1)
1. Patients are often in a low preload state due to venous
pooling (from prolonged standing) or dehydration.
2. Superimposed anxiety, pain or fear triggers a sympathetic
surge.
3. Sympathetic surge augments ventricular contraction.
4. Vigorous contraction coupled with low preload results in
low ESV, which triggers intracardiac mechanoreceptors.
5. The mechanoreceptors trigger the vagal reflex.
6. Vagal reflex triggers bradycardia, vasodilatation, or both,
resulting in hypotension and syncope. 
Table 26–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. M.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Neurocardiogenic
Preceding pain, anxiety,
Tilt table if 
syncope 
fear or prolonged 
recurrent 
(faint)
standing; rapid
normalization of
consciousness; absence
of heart disease
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Dehydration
History of vomiting,
Orthostatic 
diarrhea, poor oral
measurement of 
intake
BP and pulse
Medications
History of α-blockers,
Orthostatic 
other antihypertensive
measurement of 
medication
BP and pulse
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Hypertrophic
History of exertional 
ECG
cardiomyopathy
syncope,
Echocardiogram
Family history of 
sudden death 
Systolic murmur, which
increases on standing
Seizure
Prolonged period of
EEG
lethargy, confusion or
Neuroimaging
amnesia following
syncope suggesting
postictal period
Tonic-clonic activity,
incontinence,
tongue biting
C. Other forms of neurally mediated syncope include situational
syncope and carotid sinus syndrome (see end of chapter). 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. Provocative circumstances include prolonged standing
(37%), hot weather (42%), lack of food (23%), fear
(21%), and acute pain (14%).
2. No single finding is very sensitive for neurocardiogenic
syncope (14–40%).  
3. However, certain findings are fairly specific and increase
the likelihood of neurocardiogenic syncope when present. 
a. Feeling warm (LR+ 12) 
b. Prolonged standing (LR+ 9.0) 
c. Abdominal discomfort prior to syncope (LR+ 8) 
d. Occurring during injection/cannulation (LR+ 7)
e. Dehydration (LR+ 3.7)
f. Nausea after syncope (LR+ 3.5)
g. Although neurocardiogenic syncope can occur after
exercise it is rare during exercise. Syncope during exer-
cise should raise the suspicion of cardiogenic syncope. 
B. Laboratory and radiologic tests
1. Patients with a typical history, a normal physical exam and
ECG, and no evidence of heart disease  or red flags (Fig-
ure 26–7), do not require further testing.
2. Patients with an atypical history (ie, without a clear precipitant)
require an echocardiogram, and occasionally tilt-table testing.
3. Tilt-table testing is particularly useful in patients with
recurrent events in whom the diagnosis is unclear. 
a. The patient is initially supine for 20–45 minutes.
b. The table is then tilted to 60–80 degrees and the
patient kept upright for 30–45 minutes during which
time the pulse and BP are continuously monitored.
c. Criteria for a positive test include the reproduction of
the presyncopal or syncopal symptoms with hypoten-
sion, bradycardia, or both.
d. Sensitivity is 26–80% and specificity is about 90%, but
they cannot be precisely determined due to the lack of
a gold standard. 
(1) Furthermore, estimates vary depending on tilt-
table angle, duration, and medications used. 
(2) A variety of medications can increase sensitivity but
decrease specificity (eg, isoproterenol and nitrates).
Treatment 
A. Patients should be reassured, instructed to avoid triggers, and lie
down if they notice the premonitory signs of an impending faint.
B. Vasodilators and diuretics should be eliminated or decreased
(ie, α-blockers and diuretics).
C. Isometric arm and leg contractions in which the muscles are
tensed for 2 minutes significantly raises BP. 94% of clinical
events are aborted with this maneuver.
D. Midodrine is an α-agonist that has prevented neurocardio-
genic syncope in a few small studies.
E. Orthostatic training programs have been effective in patients
with drug refractory recurrent neurocardiogenic syncope.
F. Other therapies have included fludrocortisone and selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors. 
G. β-Blockers slow HR and improve ventricular filling. While
successful in short-term trials, long-term placebo-controlled
trials have not demonstrated a benefit over placebo. The use
of β-blockers is therefore controversial.
H. “Rate drop” dual chamber pacemakers (triggered by a sudden
drop in HR) may be effective in select patients with recurrent
severe neurocardiogenic syncope, when syncope is due to pro-
found bradycardia or asystole. This should only be considered
in severe drug refractory cases.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
1
Mr. M’s well-defined precipitant for neurocardiogenic syn-
cope and typical premonitory symptoms combined with
the absence of red flags for serious cardiac syncope
(such as HF, ischemic heart disease, advanced age,
abnormal physical exam or ECG) makes neurocardiogenic
syncope the most likely diagnosis. You still wonder if you
need to consider hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, neurocardiogenic syn-
cope? Have you ruled out the active alterna-
tives? Do other tests need to be done to
exclude the alternative diagnoses?
422 /  CHAPTER 26
Prolonged standing,
venous pooling
Decreased venous
return
Markedly reduced
end-systolic volume
Vagal reflex
Pain or anxiety
Sympathetic surge
Vigorous cardiac
contraction
Bradycardia
Vasodilation
Hypotension and
syncope
Figure 26-1. Pathophysiology of neurocardiogenic syncope.
FP
FP
FP
FP
SYNCOPE /  423
Alternative Diagnosis:
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 
Textbook Presentation
Patients with hypertropic cardiomyopathy may be asymptomatic
and discovered due to a family history of sudden cardiac death,
during the evaluation of an asymptomatic systolic murmur, dur-
ing pre-participation athletic screening, or when symptoms occur
(syncope, heart failure, atrial fibrillation, or cardiac arrest). 
Disease Highlights
A. The most common cause of cardiovascular death among
young athletes
B. A large number of different autosomal dominant mutations
in genes that encode sarcomere constituents result in myocyte
hypertrophy with disarray, increased cardiac fibrosis, and dias-
tolic dysfunction.
C. Affects 1/500 adults in the general population
D. Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) is the hallmark of the
disease.
1. LVH may develop in childhood, adolescence, or adult life.
2. LVH can affect any part of the LV, although often prefer-
entially affects the ventricular septum which can cause
outflow tract obstruction.
3. Outflow tract obstruction increases the risk of progression
to heart failure, stroke, and sudden cardiac death. The out-
flow obstruction can be fixed or dynamic (variable). 
4. The obstruction may generate high velocities, which draw
the mitral valve leaflet toward the septum (known as sys-
tolic anterior motion of the mitral valve). This further
aggravates the outflow obstruction and simultaneously
causes mitral regurgitation. 
5. Chamber size affects magnitude of obstruction. Smaller
chamber size brings the anterior leaflet of mitral valve
closer to the hypertrophied septum and increases obstruc-
tion. This occurs when preload decreases (such as with
standing), or when afterload decreases or contractility
increases. 
E. Most patients are asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic. 
F. Complications include HF, angina, mitral regurgitation, atrial
fibrillation, stroke, syncope, and sudden cardiac death.
1. HF 
a. More common in patients with outflow obstruction
b. Develops due to a combination of outflow obstruction
and diastolic dysfunction
c. Dyspnea on exertion is the most common symptom.
d. Aggravated by concomitant mitral regurgitation when
present
2. Angina
a. May be typical or atypical in quality
b. Develops in 25–30% of patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy
c. Ischemia is not primarily due to epicardial CAD, but
results from a mismatch of oxygen supply and demand. 
d. Aggravated by massive LVH and abnormal microvas-
culature
e. Concomitant CAD may be present
3. Syncope
a. Develops in 15–25% of patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy
b. Secondary to a variety of mechanisms, including ven-
tricular arrhythmias, outflow tract obstruction,
ischemia and, rarely, conduction blocks
4. Sudden cardiac death is the most dreaded complication.
a. Often occurs in previously asymptomatic patients
b. Secondary to ventricular tachyarrhythmias (which may
in turn be triggered by outflow tract obstruction and
ischemia)
c. Annual risk among all patients with hypertrophic car-
diomyopathy: 0.6–1%
d. Major risk factors include the following: 
(1) Prior events
(a) Prior cardiac arrest
(b) Spontaneous sustained VT
(2) High risk clinical factors
(a) Family history of sudden cardiac death in first-
degree relative
(b) Unexplained syncope (particularly if repeti-
tive, exercise-induced, or occurs in children)
(c) Massive LVH (≥30 mm)
(d) Abnormal BP response to exercise 
(e) Nonsustained VT on Holter monitoring
5. Atrial fibrillation
a. Left atrial enlargement may develop secondary to
decreased LV compliance or mitral regurgitation and cre-
ates a substrate for the development of atrial fibrillation.
b. Atrial fibrillation decreases LV filling and worsens the
outflow tract obstruction.
c. Amiodarone is often used for these patients.
6. Stroke usually secondary to concomitant atrial fibrillation
and subsequent embolization.
F. Annual evaluation
1. History and physical exam
2. Family history
3. Echocardiography
4. 48-hour Holter monitoring
5. Exercise stress testing (to assess BP response to exercise and
evaluate ischemia)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The classic murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a harsh
systolic murmur heard at the apex and lower left sternal border. 
1. It is accentuated by maneuvers that decrease chamber size
(resulting in an increased obstruction).  
2. The murmur increases as a patient goes from a squatting
to a standing position (sensitivity 95%, specificity 84%;
LR+ 5.9, LR−0.06). 
3. Passive leg elevation decreases the murmur (sensitivity
85% specificity 91%; LR+ 9.4, LR−0.16). 
B. ECG findings
1. Abnormal in 92% of patients (73% in asymptomatic
patients without obstruction)
FP
424 /  CHAPTER 26
2. Repolarization abnormalities (ST-segment elevation,
depression or T-wave inversions) are found in 86% of
patients although less common in asymptomatic, nonob-
structed patients (58%).
3. LVH present in 81% obstructed patients and 48% nonob-
structed patients
4. Other abnormalities include: Prominent Q waves, left
atrial enlargement, and left axis deviation. 
5. ECG abnormalities may precede echocardiographic abnor-
malities and may increase in frequency with age.
C. Echocardiogram 
1. May be normal in affected young children
2. Often first appears abnormal during adolescence
3. LV wall thickening (≥15 mm) in the absence of other
conditions known to cause LVH (ie, hypertension or aor-
tic stenosis).  
a. LVH can occur in any part of the LV and in an array of
distributions but is often asymmetric in distribution.
b. The classic pattern that has specific consequences is
marked septal hypertrophy.
D. DNA analysis for mutant genes is not widely available but is the
most definitive method for establishing hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy. This is particularly useful when another family member
has been affected and the particular mutation is known. 
Treatment
A. Medical therapy
1. Patients should be told to avoid dehydration and strenu-
ous exertion.
2. β-Blockers 
a. Decrease contractility and slow HR, augmenting dias-
tolic filling and thereby decreasing dynamic outflow
obstruction 
b. May also decrease ischemia
3. Many drugs are contraindicated and medications should
be instituted cautiously. 
B. Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) therapy is rec-
ommended by The American College of Cardiology for
patients with a history of a prior cardiac arrest, spontaneous
sustained VT, or ≥1 of the major risk factors listed above. 
C. Surgical therapy (septal myomectomy) can decrease the degree
of obstruction in severely symptomatic patients (ie, sudden
cardiac death, syncope, heart failure) with documented gradi-
ents of > 30 mm at rest or 50 mm with exercise. 
D. Catheter-based alcohol septal ablation can induce septal
infarction and is another option. 
1. However, compared with surgical myomectomy, there
appears to be an increased risk of subsequent life-threatening
arrhythmias, complications, and less reliable symptom relief.
2. Surgical therapy remains the gold standard over alcohol
infusion.
E. Family members of affected patients should be screened for
the specific mutation (if it is known) or with annual echocar-
diograms and ECG (from 12 to 18 years of age) if the muta-
tion is not known. After age 18, recommendations call for
screening every 5 years. 
F. Preparticipation screening of all young competitive athletes
has been demonstrated to reduce the incidence of sudden car-
diac death by 79% primarily due to a reduction in deaths
from cardiomyopathy. 
CASE RESOLUTION
1
As noted above Mr. M’s history and physical exam and
normal ECG suggest neurocardiogenic syncope. There is
no family history of sudden cardiac death, significant
murmur, or ECG abnormality to suggest hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. There is no history of dehydration or
offending medications (eg, vasodilators). Tilt-table test-
ing is not indicated in patients with isolated episodes of
well-defined neurocardiogenic syncope. Mr. M is reas-
sured, and although embarrassed, he feels much better.
After explaining the pathophysiology of his disorder, you
initiate standard recommendations for the prevention of
further episodes.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mr. C is a 65-year-old man who comes to see you with a
chief complaint of syncope. He reports that he was sit-
ting at home watching television when he suddenly lost
consciousness without any warning. His wife reports that
he was unresponsive for approximately 30 seconds. There
was no tonic-clonic activity or incontinence, and the
patient was not confused after regaining consciousness. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Mr. C’s syncope sudden loss of consciousness without warning or
precipitant and his age raise the possibility of some form of cardiac
syncope. Active alternatives include orthostatic syncope (second-
ary to dehydration, hemorrhage, or drugs) and hypoglycemia-
induced syncope. Hypoglycemia-induced syncope is usually pre-
ceded by either confusion or sympathetic stimulation producing
tremulousness, nervousness, or diaphoresis and occurs almost
exclusively in diabetic patients taking insulin, sulfonylureas, or
thiazolidinediones. “Must not miss” alternatives include PE,
which is an uncommon cause of syncope. Neurocardiogenic syn-
cope is unlikely because syncope occurred while Mr. C was sitting
and was not preceded by any pain or anxiety. The absence of any
post syncopal confusion makes seizure unlikely. Table 26–2 lists
the differential diagnosis.
SYNCOPE /  425
2
Past medical history reveals that Mr. C has suffered from
2 myocardial infarctions (MI). Subsequently, he has dys-
pnea upon walking more than 20 yards. Mr. C also has
diabetes mellitus. His medications include atenolol,
aspirin, atorvastatin, insulin, and lisinopril. On physical
exam, his BP is 128/70 mm Hg with a pulse of 72 bpm,
which is regular. There is no significant change upon
standing. His lung exam is clear, and cardiac exam reveals
prominent JVD and a loud S3 gallop. There is no signifi-
cant murmur. He has 2+ pretibial edema, and his rectal
exam reveals guaiac-negative stool. Finally, Mrs. C
reports that she took Mr. C’s blood glucose when he
passed out and that the reading was 120 mg/dL.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Mr. C’s history of myocardial infarction (MI) is a pivotal clue and
dramatically increases the likelihood of some form of cardiac syn-
cope. Furthermore, his history of dyspnea on minimal exertion,
jugular venous distention (JVD), and S3 gallop all suggest HF. HF
in turn markedly increases the likelihood of VT. His lack of pos-
tural BP change argues against orthostatic syncope from dehydra-
tion, hemorrhage, or medications. His normal blood glucose at
the time of the event effectively rules out hypoglycemia. PE is pos-
sible but less likely.
Leading Hypothesis: Cardiac Syncope
Textbook Presentation
Cardiac syncope refers to syncope secondary to a disorder arising
within the heart. Arrhythmias (either tachyarrhythmias or brad-
yarrhythmias) are the most common disorders, although occasion-
ally syncope may be secondary to severe valvular heart disease
(eg, aortic stenosis). Rare causes of cardiac syncope include aortic
dissection, cardiac tamponade, and atrial myxoma. Classically,
patients with cardiac syncope are elderly patients with known heart
disease (ie, HF or CAD) who experience sudden syncope, which
may occur without warning. Patients may have palpitations. 
Disease Highlights
A. The presence of heart disease is the single most important
prognostic factor in patients with syncope. 
1. Cardiac syncope is associated with increased mortality.
The 1-year mortality rate in patients with cardiac syncope
is 18–33%, compared with 6% in patients with syncope
of unknown cause.
2. Subsequent mortality in patients experiencing syncope
increases with the severity of heart disease.
a. Class 1–2 HF, OR 7.7
b. Class 3–4 HF, OR 13.5
3. Patients in whom cardiac syncope is suspected should be
admitted for evaluation (see Figures 26–7, 26–8).
4. Among patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, sudden car-
diac death (presumably arrhythmogenic) accounts for
30% of the mortality. 
B. Although there are a large number of cardiac dysrhythmias,
only a relative few produce syncope. Most supraventricular
tachyarrhythmias will not cause syncope because the AV node
limits the ventricular response rate. The most common
arrhythmias associated with syncope include
1. Tachycardias
a. VT
b. Supraventricular tachycardias associated with an
accessory pathway (ie, WPW syndrome [see end of
chapter]).
2. Bradycardias: 34% of patients with heart disease have sig-
nificant bradycardias.
a. Sinus node dysfunction
(1) Sinus bradycardia (< 35 bpm)
(2) Sinus pauses defined as > 3 seconds (or > 2 seconds
with symptoms)
b. AV heart block (second- or third-degree)
c. Atrial fibrillation with a slow ventricular response
Table 26–2. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Cardiac
History of CAD, HF, or 
ECG
syncope 
valvular heart disease
Echocardiogram
Syncope while supine
Stress test
or with exercise
Event monitor
Palpitations S3,
EP study
JVD, or significant
murmur
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Dehydration
History of vomiting,
Orthostatic 
or hemorrhage
diarrhea, poor oral intake 
measurement 
History of melena or
of BP and pulse
rectal bleeding
Positive fecal occult
blood test 
Medications
History of α-blockers,
Orthostatic
other antihypertensive
measurement of 
medication
BP and pulse
Hypoglycemia
Insulin, sulfonylureas, or
Glucose 
thiazolidinediones 
measurement at
therapy
time of event
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
PE 
Risk factors for PE
CT angiogram
Pleuritic chest pain
Ventilation- 
or dyspnea
perfusion scan
Loud S2
Leg Dopplers 
Unexplained persistent
Angiogram 
hypotension
Right heart strain on ECG
(right bundle-branch block,
right axis deviation) or right
ventricular dilatation on
echocardiogram
426 /  CHAPTER 26
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History
1. Syncope in patients with suspected or certain heart disease
a. Preexistent cardiac disease increases the risk of cardiac
syncope, and the absence of cardiac disease markedly
decreases the risk of cardiac syncope (Table 26–3).
b. Syncope while supine or during exertion increases the
likelihood of cardiac syncope (LR+ 6 and 3.5, respec-
tively). However, since neither of these features is sen-
sitive for cardiac syncope, their absence does not
diminish the likelihood of cardiac syncope.
2. Syncope in patients without known or suspected heart dis-
ease: Palpitations increased the likelihood of cardiac syn-
cope (LR+ 5.8)
B. Laboratory tests
1. An abnormal ECG increases the OR of cardiac arrhyth-
mias in patients without neurocardiogenic syncope (OR,
23.5 [CI, 7–87]).
2. Certain ECG findings may suggest particular cardiac
etiologies.
a. ECG evidence of prior MI or a long QT interval
increases the likelihood of VT.
b. ECG findings of significant bradycardia, second- or
third-degree AV block increase the likelihood of a sig-
nificant bradycardia.
c. BBB suggests intermittent AV block. 
d. RV strain (S1Q3T3) or right BBB suggests PE.
e. Ischemic changes suggest MI.
f. Delta wave or short PR interval suggests an accessory
pathway (eg, WPW syndrome).
3. Echocardiograms
a. Used to assess LV function
b. Used to assess valve function (eg, aortic stenosis)
c. VT is much more common in presence of LV dysfunction.
4. Exercise testing
a. Particularly useful in patients with exertional syncope 
b. Also obtained in patients with cardiac disease
5. Holter monitoring: External cardiac leads are applied to
the patient and a 24- to 48-hour recording of the cardiac
rhythm is made.
a. Diagnostic only if
(1) Arrhythmia captured and patient symptomatic
during arrhythmia or
(2) Rhythm normal during symptoms (excludes an
arrhythmia)
b. Often nondiagnostic due to
(1) Absence of arrhythmia during study
(2) Absence of symptoms during arrhythmia
6. External loop recorders
a. External devices that can be worn for up to 1 month. A
continuous recording is made.
b. If symptoms occur, most recent 2–5 minutes can be
frozen in memory and transmitted by telephone.
c. Relative short duration of monitoring (1 month) still
limits sensitivity. 
d. Often used in patients with nondiagnostic Holter
monitoring, particularly when symptoms are infre-
quent. Sensitivity is 14%, compared with long-term
implantable loop recorder.
7. Implantable loop recorders have been used successfully in
some patients with recurrent unexplained syncope. The
yield in such patients has been reported at 90%. This may
be particularly useful at detecting bradycardias missed by
electrophysiologic (EP) studies.
8. EP studies are invasive procedures that use a right heart
catheterization. During EP studies, stimuli are delivered to
the heart in order to detect bradyarrhythmias and acces-
sory pathways as well as to elicit tachyarrhythmias.
a. Sensitivity is 90% for VT.
b. Sensitivity for bradyarrhythmias is low (33%).
c. Overall diagnostic yield of EP studies
(1) 36–70% in patients with heart disease
(2) 22% in patients with abnormal ECGs
(3) 14% in select patients with normal ECGs without
heart disease
d. Indications for EP studies in patients with unexplained
syncope include
(1) Prior MI 
(2) Structural heart disease 
(3) Impaired LV function
FP
FP
Table 26–3. Sensitivity, specificity, and LRs for cardiac syncope.
Clinical Feature
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
LR+
LR–
Patients with suspected or certain heart disease
Prior history of cardiac disease
95%
45%
2.1
0.09
Syncope while supine
12%
98%
6
0.90
Syncope with effort
14%
96%
3.5
0.90
Patients without suspected or certain heart disease
Palpitations
75%
87%
5.8
0.29
SYNCOPE /  427
(4) Bifascicular block
(5) Monitoring suggests sinus node dysfunction or AV
block
e. Risk of EP studies include cardiac perforation, MI, AV
fistulae (< 3%), deep venous thrombosis, and PE.
2
Mr. C’s serum troponin levels are undetectable (thus
excluding acute MI). The ECG shows Q waves in leads
V1–V4 and II, III and aVF consistent with prior anterior
and inferior MI. The PR interval is normal. There is no evi-
dence of sinus bradycardia, sinus pause, or AV block. The
QRS width is normal, excluding BBB. An echocardiogram
reveals severe LV dysfunction with hypokinesis of the
anterior and inferior walls. The ejection fraction is esti-
mated to be 25%. The aortic valve is normal without evi-
dence of aortic stenosis.
Mr. C’s ECG and echocardiogram confirm severe LV dysfunction,
markedly increasing the likelihood of some form of cardiac syn-
cope. In particular, patients with LV dysfunction are at high risk
for VT. There are no ECG findings to suggest bradycardia (ie,
heart block, BBB, sinus bradycardia). The leading hypothesis is
revised to VT.
Revised Leading Hypothesis:VT
Textbook Presentation
Patients with VT may be asymptomatic or have symptoms that
range from palpitations to lightheadedness, near syncope, syn-
cope, or sudden cardiac death. 
VT occurs most commonly in patients with CAD
and HF and should be seriously considered when
patients with preexisting CAD or HF present with
syncope.
Disease Highlights
A. Etiology and associations
1. Ischemic heart disease
a. Associated with CAD in 80% of cases
b. May be secondary to acute ischemia/MI or prior scar
2. Heart failure
3. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
4. Valvular heart disease
5. Drugs (antiarrhythmic, antipsychotic, tricyclic antidepres-
sant and other drugs that prolong the QT interval)
6. Electrolyte disorders (hypokalemia, hypocalcemia, hypo-
magnesemia)
7. Congenital disorders
a. Congenital heart disease
b. Long QT syndrome
(1) The ECG of affected families demonstrates long
refractory periods (long QT intervals)
(2) Affected patients are at risk for sudden cardiac death
from a form of VT called torsades de pointes. 
(3) Arrhythmias may be precipitated by emotional or
physical stress.
(4) Associated with congenital neural deafness
(5) A variety of drugs and electrolyte disturbances may
also prolong the QT interval and predispose to VT
and sudden cardiac death.
c. Brugada syndrome
(1) Unusual disorder secondary to mutation in the
sodium channel gene, which predisposes patients
to polymorphic VT and sudden death.
(2) Suggestive baseline ECG abnormalities include a
right BBB pattern with ST elevation in the right
precordial leads. 
B. ECG criteria
1. ≥3 consecutive wide complex (QRS ≥.12 seconds) beats
(Figure 26–2)
a. Supraventricular tachycardias can also occasionally mani-
fest wide QRS complexes. 
b. ECG criteria that increase the likelihood that the wide
complex tachycardia is VT include fusion beats, capture
beats, AV dissociation, or a QRS width > .14 seconds. 
c. A history of CAD or HF increases the likelihood that the
wide complex tachycardia is VT.
2. Sustained VT is defined as VT lasting longer than 30 seconds.
C. Evaluation
1. Obtain baseline ECG to look for evidence of ischemia,
long QT syndrome
2. Stress testing (and coronary angiography in selected
patients) is recommended for patients with exercise-induced
syncope or chest pain or an intermediate or greater proba-
bility of CAD.  
3. Obtain echocardiogram to evaluate LV function and rule
out valvular heart disease. 
4. EP testing is recommended for selected patients (see above).
D. Prognosis 
1. VT is a potentially life-threatening arrhythmia.
2. Predictors of mortality in patients with VT include prior
cardiac arrest, LV dysfunction, post MI, or inducible VT
on EP studies. 
Treatment
A. The management of acute VT evolves rapidly and is beyond
the scope of this text. Please see appropriate ACLS guidelines.
B. Prevention of recurrent VT and sudden cardiac death 
Figure 26–2. Ventricular tachycardia.
428 /  CHAPTER 26
1. Treat underlying conditions
a. Treat ischemic heart disease (including revasculariza-
tion if necessary)
b. Treat HF (ACE inhibitors, β-blockade, and spironolac-
tone have all been shown to decrease mortality)
c. Optimize electrolytes, including magnesium
2. Specific therapy for the treatment and prevention of VT
includes antiarrhythmic drugs (especially β-blockers and
possibly amiodarone), catheter ablation, ICDs, and com-
binations of the above. 
a. ICDs are implanted devices that monitor the cardiac
rhythm and automatically detect and shock patients
in VT.
b. ICDs are used in selected patients at high risk of sud-
den death including survivors of sudden death and
patients in whom syncope was believed to have been
caused by VT. 
c. Indications for ICD therapy include
(1) Patients with syncope and heart disease and docu-
mented prior spontaneous VT or inducible VT
(during EP testing)
(2) Patients with syncope and significant LV dysfunc-
tion (ejection fraction ≤30%) in whom VT can-
not be documented or induced but in whom syn-
cope remains unexplained (and presumed due to
VT)
(3) Patients with unexplained syncope and inducible
sustained VT or ventricular fibrillation during EP
studies.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
The pretest probability of VT is very high. You elect to admit
Mr. C for inpatient monitoring. You still wonder if a significant
bradyarrhythmia or a PE might be responsible for Mr. C’s syncope.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, VT? Do other tests
need to be done to exclude the alternative
diagnoses?
Alternative Diagnosis: Bradycardia from Sick
Sinus Syndrome (SSS)
Textbook Presentation
The presentation of SSS depends on the duration and severity of
the bradyarrhythmia. When the bradyarrhythmia is severe and pro-
longed, patients may experience sudden syncope. With less severe
bradycardia, patients may experience weakness, dyspnea on exer-
tion, angina, transient ischemic attacks, or near syncope. Since the
bradyarrhythmia may be short lived, patients may recover without
intervention. 
Disease Highlights
A. Episodic or persistent failure of sinus node
B. Most common indication for pacemaker placement
C. Often seen in the elderly (mean age 68) due to fibrosis and
degeneration of sinus node
D. Underlying CAD is common and contributes to the patho-
genesis of SSS in some patients.
E. A variety of medications can depress sinus node function and
aggravate SSS, including β-blockers, verapamil, diltiazem,
digoxin, clonidine, methyldopa, and other antiarrhythmics
F. Electrical manifestations may include
1. Sinus bradycardia < 40 bpm
2. Sinus pauses > 2 seconds
3. Sinus arrest (with an escape junctional rhythm)
4. Sinoatrial exit block (inability of the sinus impulse to exit
the sinus node)
G. Concomitant AV conduction disturbances are present in over
50% of patients with SSS. 
H. Associated with supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, in 40–60%
of patients, particularly atrial fibrillation (tachy-brady syn-
drome). Such patients may complain of palpitations. The
bradycardia often follows termination of the tachycardia.
Tachy-brady syndrome markedly increases the risk of death or
nonfatal stroke (2- to 3-fold) compared with SSS alone.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Simultaneous symptoms and ECG findings (sinus bradycardia,
significant pauses or sinus exit block) establishes the diagnosis.
B. Holter monitoring may be used but is often nondiagnostic
due to the intermittent nature of the arrhythmia.
C. External cardiac event monitors allow for a longer period of
monitoring and correlation with symptoms.
D. Carotid sinus massage (CSM) may cause prolonged pauses in
patients with SSS (> 3 seconds).
E. Internal loop recorders have also been used.
F. Pharmacologic studies 
1. Adenosine slows sinus node activity. 
2. Small studies suggest patients with SSS have delayed sinus
node recovery following adenosine administration. 
3. The diagnostic accuracy is similar to EP studies.
G. EP studies
1. Useful in patients with severe symptoms when simultane-
ous rhythm abnormalities and symptoms are unavailable.
2. Sinus node recovery time (SNRT) and sinoatrial conduction
time (SACT) can be measured. Abnormal responses are 70%
sensitive, 90% specific. Normal results do not rule out SSS.
Treatment
A. Discontinue any medications that may adversely affect sinus
function (see above). (If β-blockers or other drugs cannot be
discontinued, patients may require pacemaker.)
B. Pacemakers
1. Indications
a. Documented symptomatic sinus node dysfunction
b. Chronotropic incompetence: In this condition, the
sinus rate does not increase appropriately with physical
activity, leading to a relative bradycardia and symptoms.
c. Pacemakers are used in certain situations when SSS is
suspected but cannot be confirmed.
(1) Patients with HR < 40 bpm and prior symptoms
(2) EP study shows long SNRT in patients with prior
unexplained syncope.
SYNCOPE /  429
2. Atrial pacing is associated with a lower incidence of com-
plications (eg, HF, atrial fibrillation, embolization, and
possibly mortality) than isolated ventricular pacing.
C. Anticoagulation is indicated for certain patients with SSS.
1. Patients with concurrent tachy-brady syndrome and atrial
fibrillation (persistent or intermittent) 
2. Patients with a ventricular pacemaker (rather than an atrial
pacemaker) 
3. For the remaining patients, the risk of embolization is low
(1.2–1.4%/y) and the benefits of anticoagulation must be
weighed against the risks.
Alternative Diagnosis: Bradycardia
due to AV Heart Block
Textbook Presentation
Depending on the duration and severity of the heart block, patients
with AV block may be asymptomatic or complain of syncope, near
syncope, palpitations, angina or transient ischemic attacks. 
Disease Highlights
A. Secondary to conduction abnormalities in the AV node, bun-
dle of His, or bundle branches. 
B. Classification (Table 26–4)
1. In first-degree AV block all of the sinus impulses (P waves)
are conducted (but the PR interval is prolonged), whereas in
third-degree AV block, none of the P waves are conducted
(Figure 26–3). 
2. In second-degree block, some of the impulses are conducted.
C. In second- or third-degree AV block, the ventricular rate slows
and may depend on lower intrinsic pacemakers residing
within the ventricle. The bradycardia can result in dyspnea,
angina, hypotension, syncope, or death.
D. AV nodal disease should also be suspected in patients with
atrial fibrillation who have a slow ventricular response and are
not on drugs that slow AV conduction (eg, digoxin, β-blockers,
verapamil, or diltiazem).
E. Etiology
1. Fibrosis of the conduction system
2. Ischemic heart disease
3. Drugs (eg, β-blockers, verapamil, diltiazem, digoxin, amio-
darone)
The combination of verapamil and β-blockers
should always be avoided. There is a high incidence
of subsequent AV block and HF.
4. Hyperkalemia
5. Valvular heart disease (due to extension of calcification
into the conduction system)
6. Increased vagal tone
7. Miscellaneous other causes (Lyme disease, sarcoidosis, etc)
Treatment
A. Withdraw drugs that impair AV conduction.
B. Treat ischemia.
C. Correct electrolyte abnormalities.
D. Atropine can be useful in emergent situations.
E. Pacemakers 
1. Precise indications are complex. 
2. In general, pacing is recommended for patients with third-
degree AV block or Mobitz II second-degree AV block. 
3. Pacing is not usually indicated in asymptomatic first-
degree AV block or Mobitz I second-degree AV block.
Alternative Diagnosis: Pulmonary Embolism
Textbook Presentation
PE is an unusual cause of syncope (about 1%) and is covered
extensively in Chapter 14, Dyspnea. This discussion will focus on
Table 26–4. Classification of heart block.
Atrial Ventricular 
Type
Conduction
ECG Findings
Clinical Findings
Treatment
First degree 
1:1
PR interval > 0.2 seconds
None
None
QRS width usually within normal limits
Second degree
Intermittent
Progressive lengthening of PR interval until 
Associated with inferior 
Observation or 
Mobitz I
P wave is not conducted and QRS absent.
MI. Rarely progresses to 
atropine  
Next PR interval shorter than PR prior to
third-degree AV block
dropped beat
QRS width usually within normal limits
Second  degree
Intermittent
Intermittent non-conduction of P waves.
Associated with anterior 
Pacemaker
Mobitz II
More severe infranodal damage, QRS may
MI. Often progresses to 
be widened, BBB may be seen
third-degree AV block
Third-degree
∅
P waves not conducted. Complete AV
Associated with CAD, drugs,
Pacemaker
disassociation.Ventricular rate depends
degeneration, abnormal 
on escape pacemakers
electrolytes, bradycardia,
hypotension
430 /  CHAPTER 26
patients who experience syncope due to PE. Between 9% and
14% of patients with PE experience syncope. Syncope in PE is
usually secondary to massive embolization involving more than
50% of the pulmonary vascular bed. This massive embolization
increases the likelihood of findings consistent with more extensive
PE including hypotension (ranging from 14% to 76% in various
studies), cardiac arrest (24%), and ECG evidence of cor pul-
monale (S1Q3T3 or new complete or incomplete right BBB in
60%.) Despite this, the subset of patients with PE and syncope
who survive to arrive at the hospital have often stabilized due to
clot fragmentation and may be hemodynamically stable and rela-
tively asymptomatic. Dyspnea has been reported in 50–90% of
patients, hypoxia (PaO2 < 60 mm Hg) in 91%. PE should be con-
sidered as a cause of syncope in patients with dyspnea, hypoxia, a
history of risk factors for PE, pleuritic chest pain or physical exam
findings of unexplained hypotension, tachycardia, JVD, a loud S2
or a right-sided S3 gallop. Suggestive ECG findings include a
S1Q3T3 pattern, right axis deviation, or right BBB. Echocardio-
graphic findings suggestive of PE include right atrial or right ven-
tricular enlargement. An unexplained pulmonary infiltrate may be
a sign of infarction from pulmonary embolus.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
After 24 hours, Mr. C is feeling well. He is anxious to go home.
The telemetry reveals normal sinus rhythm without evidence
of intermittent AV block or VT. Stress testing is performed
and shows evidence of prior MI but no acute ischemia.
The sensitivity of telemetry is inadequate to exclude life-threaten-
ing arrhythmias such as VT. Furthermore, none of the alternative
diagnoses are suggested by the history, physical exams, or labora-
tory test results (such as AS, hypoglycemia, dehydration, orthosta-
tic hypotension, PE, SSS, or AV heart block). After careful discus-
sion with Mr. C, you order an EP study.
2
The EP study demonstrates inducible sustained VT, plac-
ing the patient at high risk for spontaneous lethal
ventricular arrhythmias. An ICD is placed. At follow-up
12 months later, Mr. C is doing well and has no subse-
quent syncopal events. His ICD has delivered 5 shocks.
Figure 26–3. Third-degree atrioventricular block.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mrs. S is a 60-year-old woman who arrives at the emer-
gency department via ambulance after an episode of syn-
cope. The patient reports that she was eating dinner, and
the next thing she knew she was in the emergency depart-
ment. Mr. S reports that he found his wife lying on the floor
next to the dining room table when he came home. At that
time, Mrs. S was conscious but lethargic. The food and
plate were scattered on the floor. There was no evidence of
incontinence. On physical exam, her vital signs are normal.
HEENT exam reveals a contusion over the right eye and
bruising along the right half of her tongue. Cardiac and pul-
monary exams are normal. Abdominal exam is unremark-
able. Stool is guaiac negative. Neurologic exam is nonfocal. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The remarkable feature of Mrs. S’s history is the prolonged period
of lethargy and confusion that persisted until she reached the
emergency department. This pivotal clue is highly suggestive of
a postictal period following a seizure. Furthermore, the patient’s
bruised tongue is a diagnostic fingerprint that markedly increases
the likelihood of a seizure. Another consideration is hypo-
glycemia, which can also cause a prolonged period of lethargy or
confusion. This contrasts with patients suffering from cardiac or
neurocardiogenic syncope who tend to regain consciousness
almost immediately and do not usually suffer from prolonged
confusion, lethargy, or memory loss. Therefore, despite the
absence of witnessed tonic-clonic activity, the prolonged period
of confusion, amnesia and bruised tongue are highly suggestive of
seizures. Table 26–5 lists the differential diagnosis.
Patients with syncope should be asked, “What was
the next thing you remember?” Patients who do not
remember the ambulance ride or suffer a period of
amnesia following the event (> 5 minutes) should
be evaluated for seizures. 
SYNCOPE /  431
3
The patient reports no prior history of epilepsy, CNS
tumor, or stroke. She has no history of cerebrovascular
disease or head trauma. She has no history of diabetes
and is not taking any medications. She does not remem-
ber any antecedent event. She has no cardiac history
and walks 2 miles every day without dyspnea or chest
pain. She reports no history of melena or hematochezia.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Seizures
Textbook Presentation
Generalized seizures classically present with tonic-clonic activity,
loss of postural tone, incontinence, and a prolonged postictal
period of lethargy. The purpose of this review is to focus on fea-
tures that help distinguish seizures from syncope.
Disease Highlights
A. 3% of US population suffers a seizure in their lifetime
B. Seizures are the cause of syncope in 1–7% of patients. 
C. Etiology of seizure and prevalence in patients over age 60
1. Idiopathic, 35%
2. Ischemic, 49%
3. CNS tumor, 11%
a. Primary CNS tumor, 35%
b. Metastatic, 59%
4. CNS trauma, 3%
5. CNS infection, 2%
6. Metabolic disturbances
a. Hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia (marked)
b. Hypoxia
c. Hyponatremia
d. Hypocalcemia
e. Uremia
7. Medications (Numerous medications have been impli-
cated. Some commonly used medications that rarely cause
seizures include cyclosporine, fentanyl, meperidine, lido-
caine, phenothiazines, quinolones, theophylline, tricyclic
antidepressants, and bupropion)
8. Illicit drugs (ie, methylenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA;
Ecstasy], cocaine)
9. Withdrawal states (ie, alcohol, baclofen, benzodiazepines,
and opioids)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Postictal confusion is the most sensitive clinical feature
(Table 26–6). The absence of a postictal period makes seizures
an unlikely cause of syncope. (sensitivity 94%, LR−0.09).
B. Tongue laceration, head turning, and unusual posturing are
the most specific clinical features and substantially increase
the likelihood of seizure (specificity 97%, LR+ 12–15).
C. Certain symptoms are unusual in patients with seizures and
reduce the likelihood of seizure.
1. Diaphoresis preceding spell, LR 0.17
2. Chest pain preceding spell, LR 0.15
3. Palpitations, LR 0.12
4. Dyspnea prior to spell, LR 0.08
5. CAD, LR 0.08
6. Syncope with prolonged standing, LR 0.05
Table 26–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. S.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Seizure
Prolonged period of
EEG
lethargy, confusion,
Contrast-enhanced
amnesia suggesting
CT or MRI scan
postictal period
Tonic-clonic activity
Incontinence
Prior stroke, CNS tumor,
or neurologic disease
Abnormal neurologic exam
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Hypoglycemia
Diabetes mellitus treated
Glucose 
with either insulin,
measurement at 
thiazolidinediones,
time of event
or sulfonylureas
Table 26–6. Sensitivity, specificity, and LRs for seizures.
Sensitivity
Specificity
Clinical Feature
(%)
(%)
LR+
LR–
Cut tongue
45
97
15
0.57
Head turning
43
97
14
0.59
Unusual posturing
35
97
12
0.67
Bedwetting
24
96
6.4
0.79
Limb jerking noted
69
88
5.8
0.35
by others
Prodromal trembling
29
94
4.8
0.76
Prodromal preoccupation
8
98
4.0
0.94
Prodromal hallucinations
8
98
4.0
0.94
Postictal confusion
94
69
3.0
0.09
Modified from Journal of the American College of Cardiology. Sheldon
Robert et al. Historical criteria that distinguish syncope from seizures,
40:142–148. Copyright (c) 2002. With permission from American College
of Cardiology Foundation.
FP
432 /  CHAPTER 26
D. Convulsive syncope
1. Limb jerking is not entirely specific for seizures.
2. 15–90% of patients with syncope not related to seizures
experience limb jerking, a phenomenon referred to as con-
vulsive syncope. Limb jerking due to syncope is associ-
ated with myoclonic jerks, which should be distinguished
from tonic-clonic activity. 
a. Myoclonic jerks tend to be arrhythmic and asymmet-
ric, whereas the opposite is true of tonic-clonic activity. 
b. Myoclonic jerks tend to be briefer than tonic-clonic
activity (average of 6.6 seconds).
c. Myoclonic jerks never precede collapse, whereas tonic-
clonic activity may precede collapse.
3. Finally, unlike generalized seizures, which are usually associ-
ated with a significant postictal period, convulsive syncope is
not associated with a significant postictal period (< 1 minute). 
4. Patients who appear to have refractory “seizure disorders”
and nonspecific abnormalities on EEG should undergo
tilt-table testing to rule out neurocardiogenic syncope
with myoclonic jerks.
E. A point score to distinguish seizures from syncope has been
developed (Table 26–7). Point scores of ≥1 suggest seizures
(sensitivity, 94%; specificity, 94%; LR+, 16; LR−, 0.06).
F. Evaluation
1. EEG  
a. Sensitivity (between episodes) of the spike and wave
pattern is 35–50% (increased with sleep deprivation)
b. Specificity 98% 
c. Indicated in the evaluation of patients with possible
seizures
2. Neuroimaging 
a. 37% of adults with new-onset seizures have structural
lesions (eg, tumors, strokes)
b. 15% of adults with new-onset seizures and nonfocal neu-
rologic exams have structural lesions on neuroimaging.
c. Indicated in all adults with new-onset seizures. 
d. In acute cases, a noncontrast CT is often performed to
rule out an intracranial bleed. Follow-up MRI is rec-
ommended due to its increased sensitivity for both
tumor and stroke.
3. Sodium, calcium, glucose, BUN, and creatinine
4. Oxygen saturation
5. Lumbar puncture 
a. A lumbar puncture should be considered if CNS infec-
tion is suspected (ie, patient is immunocompromised
or has fever, meningismus, headache, or persistent
confusion).
b. Elevated intracranial pressure should be excluded (usu-
ally with neuroimaging) prior to a lumbar puncture in
order to prevent lumbar puncture–induced herniation.
c. Platelet count, prothrombin time (PT), and partial
thromboplastin time (PTT) should be checked prior to
lumbar puncture. (Thrombocytopenia and coagu-
lopathies increase the risk of bleeding at the lumbar
puncture site and subsequent spinal cord compression
secondary to hemorrhage.)
6. Toxicology screen should be ordered if illicit drug use is
suspected.
7. Prolactin measurement: American Academy of Neurology
concluded that serum prolactin levels cannot be used to
distinguish seizures from syncope.
Treatment
Anticonvulsant therapy is complex and evolves rapidly (see neu-
rology texts).
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
The patient’s EEG revealed intermittent right temporal
spike and wave pattern. 
The patient’s history of a postictal period and tongue biting are
highly suggestive of seizures, which was confirmed on the EEG.
Since structural lesions and ischemia are common in adults with
new-onset seizures, neuroimaging is required.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
An MRI scan revealed a solitary right temporal lobe
mass. Subsequent biopsy demonstrated a glioblastoma
multiforme. The patient underwent surgical resection and
was treated with anticonvulsant therapy. She died
approximately 6 months later. 
Table 26–7. A point score to distinguish seizures from
syncope.1
Criteria
Points
Waking with cut tongue
2
Abnormal behavior (eg, limb jerking,
1
prodromal trembling, preoccupation,
hallucinations)
Lost consciousness with emotional stress
1
Postictal confusion
1
Head turning to 1 side
1
Prodromal deja vu
1
Any presyncope
−2
Lost consciousness with prolonged standing
−2
Diaphoresis before a spell
−2
1Point scores of ≥1 suggest seizures.
SYNCOPE /  433
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
4
Mrs. P is a 39-year-old woman who arrives at the emer-
gency department via ambulance with abdominal pain
and syncope. She was in her usual state of health until
the morning of admission when increasing left lower
quadrant abdominal pain developed. The pain increased in
intensity and became quite severe. Upon standing, she
lost consciousness and collapsed to the floor. She recov-
ered quickly and was helped to a chair by her husband.
When she stood several minutes later, she briefly lost
consciousness again. The patient reports that her
abdominal pain is much better. Her vital signs are BP,
105/60 mm Hg; pulse, 85 bpm; temperature, 37.0°C; and
RR, 18 breaths per minute. Her cardiac and pulmonary
exams are normal, and abdominal exam reveals mild left
lower quadrant tenderness. Her ECG is normal and her
Hct is normal at 36.0%.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Several features of Mrs. P’s syncope are noteworthy. First, her syn-
cope occurred in association with abdominal pain raising the pos-
sibility of neurocardiogenic syncope. Second, she had 2 episodes
of syncope upon standing. This pivotal clue raises the possibility
of orthostatic syncope from either dehydration, hemorrhage or
medications. PE is another possibility. Reviewing the remaining
differential diagnoses at the beginning of the chapter, her young
age, absence of preexistent cardiovascular disease, and normal
ECG argue against cardiac syncope. Aortic stenosis is unlikely in
patients without a significant systolic murmur. Her rapid restora-
tion of consciousness argues against a seizure. Table 26–8 lists the
differential diagnosis.
4
Further history reveals that Mrs. P is not taking any
medications and did not have any chest pain or dyspnea.
She has no risk factors for PE (eg, oral birth control pills,
prolonged immobilization, recent surgery or postpartum
period, cancer, or known hypercoagulable state). Your ini-
tial assessment is neurocardiogenic syncope secondary
to transient abdominal pain. 
As discussed in the first case presentation, neurocardiogenic syn-
cope is often precipitated by pain, is brief, and is followed by a
rapid restoration of consciousness. Many of Mrs. P’s features are
consistent with this diagnosis. However, both episodes of syncope
occurred immediately after standing providing a clue that her syn-
cope was in fact orthostatic. In addition, although her abdominal
pain is improved, it is still unexplained. You elect to check her BP
and pulse for orthostatic change.
4
Mrs. P’s BP while supine was 105/60 mm Hg with a pulse of
85 bpm, which changed when sitting to BP of 95/50 mm
Hg with a pulse of 90 bpm. Upon standing her BP fell to
60/0, her pulse was 140 bpm, and she lost conscious-
ness. She was quickly laid down and again rapidly
regained consciousness.
The patient’s volume status is always assessed based
on the clinical, not laboratory exam. Orthostatic
measurement of BP and pulse are critical. Life-threat-
ening hypovolemia may be overlooked if the BP and
pulse are not measured while the patient is standing. 
Mrs. P’s profound drop in BP upon standing, reflex tachycardia,
and recurrent syncope is a key pivotal clue and clearly indicate
that she is syncopal due to orthostatic hypotension. This is not
consistent with neurocardiogenic syncope. You revise the leading
hypothesis to syncope due to orthostatic hypotension.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Table 26–8. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. P.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Neurocardiogenic
Preceding pain, anxiety,
Tilt table if 
syncope (faint)
fear or prolonged standing
recurrent 
Rapid normalization
of consciousness
Absence of heart disease
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Syncope due
History of vomiting,
Orthostatic 
to orthostatic
diarrhea, decreased oral 
measurement of 
hypotension 
intake, melena, bright 
BP and pulse
red blood per rectum or
other blood loss
Medications
History of α-blockers,
Orthostatic 
other antihypertensive
measurement of 
medication
BP and pulse
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
PE 
Risk factors for PE 
CT angiogram
Pleuritic chest pain
Ventilation-
or dyspnea 
perfusion scan
Loud S2
Leg Dopplers
Unexplained persistent
Angiogram 
hypotension
Right heart strain on ECG
(right bundle-branch block,
right axis deviation) or right
ventricular dilatation
on echocardiogram
434 /  CHAPTER 26
Leading Hypothesis: Orthostatic Hypotension
Textbook Presentation
The distinguishing feature of orthostatic hypotension is the occur-
rence of syncope or symptoms (near syncope, visual blurring) when
arising. Patients often have obvious sources of fluid or blood loss.
Common causes include vomiting, diarrhea, inadequate fluid intake,
or GI bleeding (presenting as hematemesis, melena, or bright red
blood per rectum). Occasionally, orthostatic hypotension may
develop secondary to massive but occult internal bleeding (rupture of
abdominal aortic aneurysm, splenic rupture, retroperitoneal hemor-
rhage, or ruptured ectopic pregnancy). Finally, orthostatic hypoten-
sion may occur without volume loss, particularly in the elderly. 
Disease Highlights
A. Accounts for 20–30% of patients with syncope
B. Definition
1. > 20 mm Hg decrease in systolic BP within 3 minutes of
standing
2. > 10 mm Hg decrease in diastolic BP within 3 minutes of
standing
3. Or > 30 bpm increase in pulse within 3 minutes of
standing
C. Etiology
1. Dehydration
a. Decreased oral intake
b. GI losses (vomiting, diarrhea)
c. Urinary losses
(1) Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
(2) Salt losing nephropathy
(3) Adrenal insufficiency
d. Over-dialysis
2. Hemorrhage
a. GI
b. Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
c. Ruptured spleen
d. Ruptured ectopic pregnancy
3. Medications
a. α-Blockers
b. Diuretics
c. Vasodilators (ie, nitrates, calcium channel blockers)
d. Tricyclic antidepressants
e. Phenothiazines
f. Alcohol and opioids
4. Prolonged bed rest
5. Autonomic insufficiency (characterized by a fall in BP
upon standing without a concomitant increase in pulse)
a. Diabetes mellitus
b. Other neurologic disorders (ie, Parkinson disease, mul-
tiple sclerosis, and numerous others)
6. Elderly (20–30% of patients > 65-years-old have orthosta-
tic hypotension although most are asymptomatic.)
7. Postprandial hypotension, particularly common in the
elderly
8. Hot environments (hot tubs, baths, saunas)
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
Several studies assessed the impact of phlebotomy on volunteers.
Phlebotomy removed a moderate (450–630 mL) to large
(630–1150 mL) volume of blood.
A. An increase in pulse of > 30 bpm with standing is both highly
sensitive for large volume blood loss (97%) and highly spe-
cific (98%, LR+ 48) (Table 26–9). The sensitivity falls dra-
matically if the patient sits instead of stands (39–78%).
B. Simple supine measurements of BP and pulse were not sensi-
tive for even large blood loss (sensitivity 12–33%).
C. Any abnormal finding on orthostatic maneuvers strongly sug-
gested volume loss (specificity 94–98%; LR+, 3.0–48).
D. The sensitivity of orthostatic measurements is greatest if the
supine and standing BPs are compared. If the supine BP is not
measured, 67% of orthostatic patients may not be identified.
E. Patients should stand for 1 minute before the measurement of
the upright BP.
F. No measure was very sensitive for moderate blood loss (0–27%).
G. Profound blood loss may occasionally paradoxically produce
bradycardia. (The reduction in ESV may trigger the neuro-
cardiogenic reflex.)
H. The admission Hct does not accurately reflect the severity of
acute hemorrhage. A fall in Hct may take 24–72 hours.
Treatment
A. Acute blood loss: Blood transfusion is appropriate in the
orthostatic patient with acute blood loss.
B. Acute plasma loss (diarrhea, vomiting, or decreased oral intake)
1. Patients able to tolerate oral intake: oral rehydration
2. Patients unable to tolerate oral intake: IV hydration
a. Normal saline is preferred. 
b. Usually 500 mL to 1 L boluses are given over 1 hour.
c. Smaller boluses may be given to fragile patients (eg,
those with a history of renal failure or HF).
d. Repeat orthostatic BP measurements are made follow-
ing each bolus as well as a lung and cardiac exam to
ensure the patient has not received excessive fluid.
e. Bolus therapy should be continued until orthostatic
hypotension resolves.
C. Chronic orthostatic hypotension
1. Hydration (water, soup, or sports drinks)
2. Discontinue offending agents (diuretics, α-blockers,
nitrates, tricyclic antidepressants, phenothiazines)
Table 26–9. Accuracy of physical exam for large blood
loss (630–1150 mL).
Clinical Finding
Sensitivity 
Specificity 
LR+
LR–
Postural increase in
97%
98%
48.0
0.03
pulse > 30 bpm
Supine HR > 100 bpm
12%
96%
3.0
0.9
Supine hypotension
33%
97%
11.0
0.7
< 95 mm Hg
Modified, with permission, from McGee S, Abernethy WB 3rd, Simel DL. Is
this patient hypovolemic? JAMA. 1999;281:1022–9.
FP
FP
SYNCOPE /  435
3. Patients are advised to arise slowly (sitting on the side of
the bed, prior to standing), avoid large meals and excessive
heat, and use waist high support hose.
4. Fludrocortisone is initial drug of choice. Monitor patients
for hypokalemia and hypertension.
5. α-Agonists (ie, midodrine) have also been used success-
fully. Side effects include urinary retention, hypertension,
and worsening HF.
6. Caffeine can be useful.
7. Erythropoietin is helpful in anemic patients.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
4
Mrs. P reports that she has not suffered from any diar-
rhea or vomiting and has taken in normal amounts of
fluid. She denies any hematemesis, melena, or bright red
blood per rectum. 
It is important to remember that Mrs. P presented with syncope
and abdominal pain. Although the pain has improved, it has not
resolved; it may provide an important clue to the underlying eti-
ology. Given the profound orthostatic hypotension and the lack of
external blood or volume loss, internal bleeding must be consid-
ered as a source of her abdominal pain and syncope. In the differ-
ential diagnosis you consider ruptured spleen, ruptured abdomi-
nal aortic aneurysm, and ruptured ectopic pregnancy. The lack of
trauma argues against splenic rupture and the patient’s age and
gender are atypical for abdominal aortic aneurysm. You wonder if
in fact she has suffered from a ruptured ectopic pregnancy. 
It is important to remember the patient’s chief com-
plaint because it usually holds the most important
clues to the diagnosis.
CASE RESOLUTION
4
Mrs. P reports that she missed her last menstrual
period. An abdominal ultrasound is performed and
reveals 750 mL of fluid (presumed to be blood) in the
pelvis. A urine pregnancy test is positive. 
Although the final diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy was not consid-
ered initially, a careful clinical exam confirmed orthostatic syn-
cope. Once that pivotal clue was discovered, the differential diag-
nosis could be narrowed and the underlying cause determined. It
is instructive to note that her initial Hct was normal because the
remaining intravascular blood had not yet been diluted by any oral
or IV fluids. 
Initial Hct measurements will not accurately reflect
the magnitude of blood loss in a patient with recent
hemorrhage.
4
Mrs. P had 2 large bore IVs placed and was typed and
crossed for RBC transfusions. CBC, PT, PTT, and platelet
counts were measured and a 1 L bolus of normal saline
was given while waiting for the packed RBCs. After volume
and blood resuscitation, she underwent surgical explo-
ration and removal of her ruptured fallopian tube.
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Aortic Stenosis
Textbook Presentation
Aortic stenosis is usually diagnosed incidentally during routine
exam rather than due to symptoms. Typically, aortic stenosis pro-
duces a loud crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur at the right
second intercostal space, which may radiate to the neck and apex.
When aortic stenosis becomes very severe, patients may have any
of the 3 cardinal symptoms: HF (dyspnea), syncope, or angina.
Disease Highlights
A. Thickening and calcification of valve leaflets results in pro-
gressive obstruction to blood flow.
B. LVH develops to compensate for the obstruction.
C. Pathophysiology of symptoms is shown in Figure 26–4.
D. Prevalence 3% in patients ≥75-years-old 
E. Etiology
1. Degeneration of a previously normal valve
2. Congenital bicuspid valve
a. 1–2% of population is born with congenital bicuspid valve.
b. Severe aortic stenosis develops in 66% of patients and
at an earlier age than in patients with tricuspid valves.
c. Aortic root structure is usually abnormal and often asso-
ciated with progressive dilation of the aortic root that
may require repair to prevent rupture or dissection.
3. Rheumatic heart disease
F. Severe aortic stenosis is characterized by valve area < 1 cm or
mean aortic valve gradient > 40 mm Hg.
G. Prognosis: Mortality increases markedly when symptoms
develop (HF, angina, or syncope). The most common symp-
toms are decreased exercise tolerance and dyspnea on exer-
tion. The mortality for symptomatic patients not undergoing
valve replacement follows:
1. Aortic stenosis and angina: 50% 5-year mortality
2. Aortic stenosis and syncope: 50% 3-year mortality
3. Aortic stenosis and dyspnea: 50% 2-year mortality
H. Other late manifestations: Atrial fibrillation (which is poorly
tolerated) and an increased bleeding tendency secondary to
disruption of large von Willebrand multimers by the abnor-
mal aortic valve.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam: Most studies demonstrate only a
fair kappa between examiners. 
1. Findings that help rule in aortic stenosis 
436 /  CHAPTER 26
a. Effort syncope in patients with a systolic murmur
(LR+ 1.3–∞, LR−0.76) 
b. Slow carotid upstroke (sensitivity, 15–42%; specificity,
95–100%; LR+ 9.2–∞) 
c. Murmur radiating to right carotid (sensitivity,
71–73%; specificity, 90%; LR+ 7.5)
2. Findings that help rule out aortic stenosis
a. Absence of any murmur (LR−0.0) 
b. Absence of murmur below right clavicular head (LR– 0.1) 
3. Murmurs may be less intense in patients with superimposed HF.
B. Doppler echocardiogram 
1. The initial test of choice to assess for aortic stenosis
2. Aortic stenosis is graded as mild if the valve area is > 1.5 cm2,
moderate if the valve area is 1–1.5 cm2, and severe if the valve
area < 1.0 cm2.
3. Recommended for patients with a systolic murmur ≥
grade III/VI
4. Also recommended to monitor progression in patients
with known aortic stenosis (annually for severe aortic
stenosis, every 1–2 years for moderate aortic stenosis, and
every 3–5 years for mild aortic stenosis).
Treatment
A. Mechanical correction
1. Symptomatic patients should be treated with valve replace-
ment, not medical therapy. Subsequent survival approaches
the age-matched normal population. 
2. Definite indications for valve replacement
a. Severe aortic stenosis in symptomatic patients
b. Severe aortic stenosis in asymptomatic patients under-
going coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) or other
valve surgery.
c. Severe aortic stenosis in asymptomatic patients with
ejection fraction < 50%.
3. Possible indication: Moderate aortic stenosis in asymp-
tomatic patients undergoing CABG or other valve 
surgery
4. Standard preoperative evaluation includes angiography in
many patients to determine whether the patient needs
concomitant CABG. This includes patients with symp-
toms of CAD or CAD risk factors (including men ≥35,
postmenopausal women, or premenopausal women ≥ 35
with CAD risk factors). 
5. Mechanical and bioprosthetic valves have been used.
a. Mechanical valves have greater durability and a signifi-
cantly lower rate of failure and need for replacement.
They are associated with a lower all-cause mortality
than bioprosthetic valves.
b. Mechanical valves are associated with an increased risk
of thromboembolism and infection. Patients with
mechanical valves require lifelong anticoagulation therapy.
In addition to warfarin, aspirin is recommended at
75–100 mg/day.
c. Bioprosthetic valves are reserved for patients who have
a contraindication to warfarin therapy or are believed
Aortic stenosis
Progressive decrease
in valve area
LV hypertrophy
Inadequate cardiac
output (especially
with exertion)
Syncope
Increasing LV end-
diastolic pressure
Subendocardial
ischemia
HF
(diastolic dysfunction)
Dyspnea on exertion
Exercise intolerance
Pulmonary edema (late)
CAD, coronary artery disease; HF, heart failure, LV, left ventricular.
Angina
CAD
(present in 50%)
Figure 26–4. Pathophysiology of symptoms in aortic stenosis.
FP
FP
SYNCOPE /  437
to be noncompliant. They may also be used in patients
over 65 (whose life expectancy makes replacement
unlikely).
d. Another alternative is the Ross procedure in which the
pulmonary valve is removed and used as the aortic
valve. The pulmonary artery is reconstructed to create
the pulmonary valve. The survival of these grafts is
good and patients do not require anticoagulation ther-
apy. In-hospital surgical mortality may be higher with
this procedure.
6. Balloon valvotomy is a poor option. It provides only tem-
porary relief (6–12 months) and does not improve sur-
vival. Complications occur in 10–20%. It is reserved for
palliation in patients with other serious (or lethal) comor-
bidities. An exception to this is the young adult with non-
calcific aortic stenosis in whom balloon valvotomy is a
viable option.
B. Vigorous exercise should be discouraged in patients with
moderate to severe aortic stenosis.
Situational Syncope 
This is a variant of neurocardiogenic syncope, in which syncope
occurs during or immediately after micturition, defecation, swal-
lowing, or coughing. 
Carotid Sinus Syndrome 
Textbook Presentation
Carotid sinus syndrome is another variant of neurally mediated 
syncope. In affected individuals pressure applied to the carotid (eg,
head turning, buttoning collar, shaving or cervical motion) produces
bradycardia and/or hypotension with syncope or near syncope. 
Disease Highlights
A. 47% of patients report symptoms precipitated by head move-
ment of looking upward.
B. More common in the elderly in whom it may account for
15% of recurrent syncopal events.
C. 15–56% of affected patients experience retrograde amnesia
and complain of falls but deny syncope.
D. One study documented carotid hypersensitivity in 46% of
patients presenting with non-accidental falls (compared with
11% in patients with accidental falls).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. CSM is applied for 5–10 seconds during continuous ECG
and BP monitoring. CSM needs to be performed on each side
separated in time by ≥1 minute. (The inhibitory response is
unilateral in 81% of patients.)
B. Criteria for a positive response include reproduction of symp-
toms (ie, syncope) and ≥3-second pause or ( 50 mm Hg drop
in BP. 
C. CSM is significantly more sensitive when performed in the
upright position on the tilt table than when the patient is supine. 
D. Carotid hypersensitivity is not specific for carotid sinus syndrome.
1. 12–35% of asymptomatic elderly patients experience
carotid hypersensitivity during CSM (specificity, 65-88%). 
2. The specificity of CSM is higher when symptoms occur in
addition to hemodynamic findings. 
3. Other diagnoses still need to be considered in elderly
patients with syncope who demonstrate carotid hypersen-
sitivity during CSM.
E. CSM is contraindicated in patients with carotid bruits, recent
cerebrovascular accident or transient ischemic attack, MI
(within 6 months), or severe dysrhythmias.
F. CSM has been complicated by transient and permanent neu-
rologic symptoms in 0.3% and 0.05% of patients, respectively.
Treatment
Pacemakers are clearly indicated in patients with cardioinhibitory
carotid sinus syndrome in whom they have been demonstrated to
reduce the incidence of subsequent syncope and falls. 
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) Syndrome  
Textbook Presentation
WPW syndrome may be asymptomatic or present with palpita-
tions, near syncope, syncope, or sudden death. In asymptomatic
cases, the diagnosis may only be made after typical findings are
discovered on an ECG performed for some other reason.
Disease Highlights
A. A congenital disorder in which an accessory bundle directly con-
nects the atria and ventricular muscle bypassing the AV node. 
B. A variety of life-threatening arrhythmias may develop that
cause syncope or sudden cardiac death. These include
1. Antidromic tachycardia in which an impulse spreads down
the accessory pathway and then back up the His-Purkinje
system in a retrograde fashion. This reentrant loop can
result in rapid tachycardias, hypotension, syncope and
sudden death.
2. The reentrant loop may run in the opposite direction
(orthodromic tachycardia, Figure 26–5).
3. Finally, atrial fibrillation or flutter can develop. In patients
with atrial fibrillation or flutter, the accessory pathway
facilitates rapid conduction of the atrial tachycardia into
the ventricles allowing rapid ventricular depolarization
and putting patients at risk for syncope or sudden death.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Baseline ECG abnormalities during normal sinus rhythm may
reveal a combination of a short PR interval and a delta wave.
1. Short PR interval
a. In healthy persons, the normal PR interval is produced
by a built-in delay at the AV node (designed to allow
atrial emptying prior to ventricular systole.) 
b. In WPW syndrome, the accessory pathway bypasses
the AV node and initiates ventricular depolarization
without such a delay; this results in a shortened PR
interval in 75% of patients (Figure 26–6).
2. Delta wave 
a. In most patients with WPW syndrome, the accessory
pathway inserts directly into ventricular muscle (rather
than into the specialized His-Purkinje system). 
b. Ventricular depolarization spreads slowly from cell to
cell through gap junctions, rather than rapidly through
the specialized rapid His-Purkinje conduction system. 
438 /  CHAPTER 26
c. This results in slow ventricular depolarization and the
slow initial upstroke of the QRS complex known as the
delta wave (Figure 26-6).
d. Finally, as this ventricular depolarization progresses, the
AV node is also processing the supraventricular impulse.
Eventually, the impulse passes through the AV node,
activates the His-Purkinje system and causes rapid depo-
larization. This results in a narrow terminal portion of
the QRS complex.  
B. EP studies can provide detailed information about the presence,
location, and conduction characteristics of the bypass tracts. 
Treatment
Therapy includes calcium channel blockers, β-blockers, digoxin,
and radiofrequency catheter ablation of the bypass tract.
Cerebrovascular Disease & Syncope
Although physicians commonly consider carotid artery obstruction
in the differential diagnosis of patients with syncope, unilateral
obstruction of the carotid will not result in syncope. Therefore,
evaluation of the anterior circulation is not indicated in the patient
with syncope. On the other hand, impairment of the posterior 
circulation may cause syncope due to interruption of blood flow to
the reticular activating system. This may occur in the subclavian
steal syndrome, vertebrobasilar insufficiency, and basilar artery
occlusion. These disorders should be considered whenever patients
have syncope and other symptoms referable to the brainstem 
(ie, diplopia, vertigo, ataxia, weakness). Finally, patients in whom
subarachnoid hemorrhage develops can present with syncope. Such
patients inevitably also complain of severe headache or confusion.
Evaluation includes emergent noncontrast head CT scan. 
REFERENCES
Alboni P, Brignole M, Menozzi C et al. Diagnostic value of history in patients with
syncope with or without heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2001;37(7):1921–8.
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice
Guidelines; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society for Cardiovas-
cular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Thoracic Surgeons, Bonow
RO, Carabello BA, Kanu C et al. ACC/AHA 2006 guidelines for the manage-
ment of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the American College
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines
(writing committee to revise the 1998 Guidelines for the Management of
Patients With Valvular Heart Disease): developed in collaboration with the
Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists: endorsed by the Society for
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions and the Society of Thoracic
Surgeons. Circulation. 2006;114(5):e84–231.
Bell WR, Simon TL, DeMets DL. The clinical features of submassive and massive
pulmonary emboli. Am J Med. 1977;62(3):355–60.
Calvo-Romero JM, Perez-Miranda M, Bureo-Dacal P. Syncope in acute pulmonary
embolism. Eur J Emerg Med. 2004;11(4):208–9.
Castelli R, Tarsia P, Tantardini C, Pantaleo G, Guariglia A, Porro F. Syncope in
patients with pulmonary embolism: comparison between patients with syn-
cope as the presenting symptom of pulmonary embolism and patients with
pulmonary embolism without syncope. Vasc Med. 2003;8(4):257–61.
Colman N, Nahm K, van Dijk JG, Reitsma JB, Wieling W, Kaufmann H. Diagnostic
value of history taking in reflex syncope. Clin Auton Res. 2004;14 Suppl 1:37–44.
Elliott PM MW. Clinical manifestations of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. In:
UpToDate; 2006.
Epstein AE, DiMarco JP, Ellenbogen KA et al. ACC/AHA/HRS 2008 Guidelines
for Device-Based Therapy of Cardiac Rhythm Abnormalities: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Revise the ACC/AHA/NASPE
2002 Guideline Update for Implantation of Cardiac Pacemakers and Antiar-
rhythmia Devices): developed in collaboration with the American Associa-
tion for Thoracic Surgery and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation.
2008;117(21):e350–408.
Etchells E, Bell C, Robb K. Does this patient have an abnormal systolic murmur?
JAMA. 1997;277(7):564–71.
Etchells E, Glenns V, Shadowitz S, Bell C, Siu S. A bedside clinical prediction rule
for detecting moderate or severe aortic stenosis. J Gen Intern Med.
1998;13(10):699–704.
European Heart Rhythm Association; Heart Rhythm Society, Zipes DP, Camm AJ,
Borggrefe M et al; American College of Cardiology; American Heart Associ-
ation Task Force; European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice
Guidelines. ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients
with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association
Task Force and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for Management of
Patients With Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Car-
diac Death). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48(5):e247–346.
Grubb BP. Clinical practice. Neurocardiogenic syncope. N Engl J Med.
2005;352(10):1004–10.
Lembo NJ, Dell'Italia LJ, Crawford MH, O'Rourke RA. Bedside diagnosis of sys-
tolic murmurs. N Engl J Med. 1988;318(24):1572–8.
Maron BJ, McKenna WJ, Danielson GK et al; American College of Cardiology/
European Society of Cardiology clinical expert consensus document on
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A report of the American College of Car-
diology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Docu-
ments and the European Society of Cardiology Committee for Practice
Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42(9):1687–713.
Figure 26–5. Orthodromic tachycardia in patients with the Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. (Reproduced, with
permission, from McPhee SJ: Pathophysiology of Disease, fifth edition. McGraw-Hill, 2006.)
SYNCOPE /  439
Figure 26–6. Electrocardiographic features of the Wolff-Parkinson
White-syndrome.(Reproduced, with permission, from Fuster V:
Hurst's The Heart, 12th edition. McGraw-Hill, 2008.)
McGee S, Abernethy WB 3rd, Simel DL. The rational clinical examination. Is this
patient hypovolemic? JAMA. 1999;281(11):1022–9.
McKeon A, Vaughan C, Delanty N. Seizure versus syncope. Lancet Neurol.
2006;5(2):171–80.
Nishimura RA, Holmes DR Jr. Clinical practice. Hypertrophic obstructive car-
diomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;350(13):1320–7.
Sheldon R, Rose S, Connolly S, Ritchie D, Koshman ML, Frenneaux M. Diag-
nostic criteria for vasovagal syncope based on a quantitative history. Eur
Heart J. 2006;27(3):344–50.
Sheldon R, Rose S, Ritchie D et al. Historical criteria that distinguish syncope
from seizures. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40(1):142–8.
Strickberger SA, Benson DW, Biaggioni I et al. AHA/ACCF Scientific Statement
on the evaluation of syncope: from the American Heart Association Coun-
cils on Clinical Cardiology, Cardiovascular Nursing, Cardiovascular Disease
in the Young, and Stroke, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research
Interdisciplinary Working Group; and the American College of Cardiology
Foundation: in collaboration with the Heart Rhythm Society: endorsed by
the American Autonomic Society. Circulation. 2006;113(2):316–27.
Warren J. The Effect of Venesection and the Pooling of Blood in the Extremities
on the Atrial Pressure and Cardiac Output in Normal Subjects with Obser-
vations on Acute Circulatory Collapse in Three Instances. 1944.
440 /  CHAPTER 26
Syncope
History: Preceding fear, anxiety, nausea; CAD, chest pain, CHF, palpitations;
medications, postictal period, tongue biting; dyspnea; careful review of
medications; family history of sudden death
Physical Exam: Vital signs, orthostatic BP and pulse, carotid sinus massage1,
cardiac and neurologic exam, stool occult blood
12-lead ECG (Ischemic changes, BBB, AV block, long QT, delta wave, short PR,
LVH, right BBB and ST elevation in V1–V3)2
Diagnosis: Consider cardiac syncope
Evaluation: Admit, monitor, echocardiogram, consider
stress test (especially if syncope exertional)
Consider: VT 
Consider EPS, ICD
Consider AV Block, SSS
Consider EPS; If negative
consider loop recording
• HF
• CAD or chest pain
• Congenital heart disease
• Significant murmur
• Abnormal ECG
• Palpitations
• Advanced age
• Exertional syncope
• Syncope while supine
• Family history of
 sudden death
• Hypotension
Pivotal Clues
(Red Flags)
See Diagnosing Syncope:
Clinical Clues
(Figure 26–8)
History of CHF or
poor LV function
AV, atrioventricular block; BBB, bundle-branch block; CAD, coronary artery disease; HF, heart failure;
CVA, cerebrovascular accident; EPS, electrophysiologic study; ICD, implantable cardiac defibrillator;
LV, left ventricular; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MI, myocardial infarction; PE, pulmonary embolism;
SSS, sick sinus syndrome; TIA, transient ischemic attack; VT, ventricular tachycardia; WPW, Wolff-Parkinson-White.
No
Yes
Bradycardia, BBB
1Carotid sinus massage is contraindicated in patients with carotid bruits, recent TIA, CVA, MI,
or dysrhythmias
2Ischemic changes suggest CAD and possible VT. Sinus bradycardia may suggest SSS.
BBB suggests possible intermittent AV block. Right BBB suggests possible PE. Long QT interval
suggests long QT syndrome and possible VT. A delta wave and short PR interval suggests
WPW syndrome. LVH may suggest hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A right BBB pattern with
ST elevation in V1–V3 suggests Brugada syndrome and VT. Low voltage in limb leads suggests
pericardial effusion.
Figure 26–7. Diagnostic approach to syncope.
SYNCOPE /  441
Clinical clues
History: Activity just prior and during event, preceding fear, anxiety, nausea; palpitations; postictal
period, tonic-clonic activity, tongue biting.
Past medical history: CAD, HF, careful review of medications
Physical exam: Vital signs, orthostatic BP and pulse, carotid sinus massage, cardiac and
neurologic exam, stool occult blood
Baseline lab oratory tests: Hct, glucose, ECG
Clear precipitant (pain, anxiety, cough,
micturation), occurred standing, preceding
nausea, rapid recovery, no red flags
Diagnosis: Neurocardiogenic syncope
Evaluation: None; If recurrent, consider tilt-table
testing
Chest pain, History of CAD, Ischemic
ECG changes
Diagnosis: Consider acute MI
Evaluation: Cardiac enzymes, consider acute
angioraphy
Insulin, sulfonylurea or thiazolidinediones
therapy
Diagnosis: Consider hypoglycemia,
if hypoglycemia documented.
Evaluation: Cardiac work-up if diagnosis unclear
Significant murmur
Diagnosis: Consider AS, HCM
Evaluation: Cardiac echo
Exclude occult
heart disease
Perform echo,
consider ETT
Exercise-induced syncope in older adult
Diagnosis: Consider AS, CAD
Evaluation: Echo, ETT
Exercise-induced syncope in young adult,
family history sudden death
Diagnosis: Consider HCM, congenital CAD or
AS, arrhythmogenic RV dysplasia, long QT
syndrome
Evaluation: Echo, ETT
Postictal period (> 5 min), tongue biting,
prolonged tonic-clonic activity, abnormal
neurologic exam
No clues
Diagnosis: Consider seizure, CVD
Evaluation: EEG, neuroimaging
Profound orthostatic hypotension; Symptoms
occur after standing
Diagnosis: Consider dehydration,
hemorrhage, medications.
Evaluation: Consider abdominal CT to rule out
occult hemorrhage if no obvious source
Findings suggest PE
History: Dyspnea, risk factors
Exam: Tachycardia, JVD, hypotension, loud S2,
RV heave, pleural rub
Lab: Hypoxia, chest radiograph → infiltrate,
ECG → RAD, RBBB, S1Q3T3
Diagnosis
Confirmed?
Normal
No
Yes
No
Consider tilt-table
if recurrent
Consider, Holter, Loop
recording EPS
Diagnosis: Consider PE
Evaluation: CTA, V/Q scan, Dopplers
AS, aortic stenosis; CAD, coronary artery disease; CTA, CT angiogram; CVD, cerebrovascular disease; ECG, electrocardiogram;
EEG, electroencephalogram; EPS, electrophysiologic study; ETT, exercise tolerance test; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy;
HF, heart failure; JVD, jugular venous distention; MI, myocardial infarction; PE, pulmonary embolism; RAD, right axis deviation;
RBBB, right bundle-branch block; RV, right ventricular; V/Q, ventilation-perfusion.
Figure 26–8. Diagnosing syncope: clinical clues.
?
27
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mrs. M is an 85-year-old woman who comes to the office
complaining of weight loss. She is quite concerned that
she has something dreadful. 
What is the differential diagnosis of involun-
tary weight loss? How would you frame the
differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Significant involuntary weight loss (IWL) is defined as > 5% loss
of usual body weight in the last 6–12 months. Significant IWL
can be a harbinger of serious underlying disease. One study docu-
mented significantly increase mortality in men with IWL com-
pared with men whose weight was stable or increased (36% vs
≈15%). There are a large number of diseases that can cause IWL,
which are best organized by system (see below). The 4 most com-
mon causes of IWL are cancer (GI, lung, and lymphoma), ≈25%;
nonmalignant GI diseases, 17%; depression and alcoholism, 14%;
and unknown, 22%. Endocrine disorders account for 7% of IWL.
Although cancer is the most common cause, it is not the cause in
most patients.
Three pivotal points are worth remembering when evaluating
the patient with IWL. First, the weight loss should be docu-
mented, because 25–50% of patients who complain of IWL, have
not in fact lost weight. Elderly adults often lose muscle mass and
simply look like they lost weight. Weight loss should be docu-
mented by comparing prior weights or if these are unavailable by
finding a significant decrease in a patient’s clothing size. 
Clinicians should verify the weight loss or docu-
ment significant changes in the patient’s clothing or
belt size.
Second, inquire about symptoms of diarrhea or malabsorption.
Symptoms of diarrhea, or large difficult to flush, malodorous
stools suggests small bowel or pancreatic disease and directs the
diagnostic search.
Third, obtain a truly comprehensive history (including a
psychosocial history) and perform a detailed head to toe phys-
ical exam and a baseline laboratory evaluation to search for
any subtle diagnostic clues that may help focus the evaluation
(Figure 27–1).
Differential Diagnosis of
Involuntary Weight Loss
A. Cardiovascular
1. Heart failure (severe)
2. Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE)
B. Endocrine
1. Adrenal insufficiency
2. Diabetes mellitus
3. Hyperthyroidism
C. GI (organized from mouth to rectum)
1. Poor dentition (50% of patients edentulous by age 65)
2. Anosmia
3. Esophageal disorders 
a. Esophageal stricture or web
b. Dysmotility
c. Esophageal cancer
4. Gastric disorders 
a. Peptic ulcer disease (PUD)
b. Gastric cancer
c. Gastroparesis
d. Gastric outlet obstruction
5. Small bowel diseases 
a. Mesenteric ischemia
b. Crohn disease
c. Celiac sprue
d. Bacterial overgrowth syndromes
e. Lactose intolerance
6. Pancreatic disease 
a. Acute pancreatitis
b. Chronic pancreatitis 
c. Pancreatic insufficiency
d. Pancreatic cancer
7. Hepatic disease 
a. Hepatitis
b. Cholelithiasis
c. Cirrhosis
d. Hepatocellular carcinoma
8. Colonic diseases 
a. Chronic constipation
b. Colon cancer
I have a patient with involuntary weight loss.
How do I determine the cause? 
442
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  443
9. Chronic GI infectious
a. Giardia lamblia
b. Clostridium difficile
c. Entamoeba histolytica
D. Hematologic/oncologic
1. Lung cancer
2. Pancreatic cancer
3. GI cancers
Document weight loss
(prior weight, change in clothing size)
History
Physical exam:
Other clinical
clues?
Pursue
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Diagnosis?
Treat and follow-up
Diarrhea, fatty oily
stools, difficult to
flush stools
Consider upper endoscopy,
abdominal ultrasound, occult
malabsorption and in smokers
consider chest CT scan
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug.
See Figure 27–5,
Table 27–9
Cardiovascular: Shortness of breath, orthopnea, dyspnea on exertion, history of valvular heart disease or endocarditis
Endocrine: Heat intolerance, tremulousness, palpitations, polyuria, polydipsia
GI: Altered taste, smell, ill-fitting dentures, odynophagia, dysphagia, abdominal pain, NSAID use, early satiety, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, difficult to flush stools, jaundice, dark urine, history of hepatitis, change in bowel habits, constipation, hematochezia, melena
Hematologic: Lymph node swelling, night sweats
Infections: Fever, chills, rash
Neurologic: Impaired memory, headaches, resting tremor, history of stroke
Psychosocial: Financial or social stressors; living arrangements (or change); bereavement; feelings of hopelessness, down, or
anhedonia; alcohol screen (CAGE or TWEAK), illicit drug use; sexual history; tobacco use
Respiratory: Cough, hemoptysis, severe dyspnea, PPD +, foreign born
Renal: History of renal disease, pruritus, hematuria
Rheumatologic: Joint or muscle pain, rash, alopecia
Medications: Over the counter and prescription (eg, digoxin, loop diuretics, diltiazem, levodopa); medical diets, radiation
COMPLETE EXAM: Include thyroid, breast, lymph node, pelvic and rectal exam and Mini-Mental Status Exam in patients
over age 60 years
Screening  labs: CBC with differential, renal panel, liver panel, fasting glucose, ESR, Ca++, TSH, urinalysis, chest radiograph;
HIV (if risk factors), update health maintenance exams (mammogram, PAP exam, colonoscopy)
Figure 27–1. Diagnostic approach: involuntary weight loss.
444 /  CHAPTER 27
4. Lymphoma
5. Miscellaneous others
E. Infectious: HIV infection or complications
F. Neurologic
1. Dementia
2. Stroke
3. Parkinson disease
G. Psychiatric 
1. Depression
2. Anxiety
3. Bipolar 
4. Schizophrenia
H. Psychosocial
1. Poverty (15% of patients over age 65 live below the poverty
line) 
2. Isolation
3. Immobility or inadequate transportation
4. Alcoholism
I. Renal/metabolic
1. Uremia
2. Hypercalcemia
J. Respiratory
1. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (severe)
2. Tuberculosis
K. Rheumatologic
1. Polymyalgia rheumatica
2. Temporal arteritis
3. Rheumatoid arthritis
4. Systemic lupus erythematosus
L. Miscellaneous
1. Drugs (eg, digoxin, loop diuretics, diltiazem, levodopa)
2. Medical diets
3. Radiation
4. Chronic pain
1
Mrs. M reports that she has lost weight over the last
6 months. She denies any diarrhea, loose, or difficult to
flush stools. She reports that her appetite is poor and
she feels fatigued. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The patient’s history is typical of many patients complaining of
weight loss. Patients report an unspecified amount of weight loss,
associated with anorexia. The first pivotal step in the evaluation is
to verify that weight loss did in fact occur.
1
Mrs. M does not remember her prior weight but reports
that her clothes are much too loose. Indeed, she has
gone out to buy clothes 2 sizes smaller. 
Mrs. M’s change in clothing size suggests true and significant
weight loss. The second pivotal step in evaluating patients with
documented weight loss determines whether the patient has
symptoms suggestive of diarrhea or malabsorption. Since the his-
tory does not suggest diarrhea or malabsorption, the third pivotal
step in the evaluation of these patients is a comprehensive, system-
based approach utilizing a thorough history and physical exam as
well as basic laboratory exams (CBC, urinalysis, renal panel, cal-
cium, liver panel, fecal occult blood test (FOBT), erythrocyte sed-
imentation rate (ESR), TSH, and chest radiograph). The myriad
of diseases associated with IWL make it vital to search for clues
before beginning a more expensive and indiscriminate investiga-
tion. In the absence of specific clues, focus first on cancer (the
most common cause of IWL and the leading hypothesis) and then
on other common causes, including nonmalignant GI disease,
psychosocial disease, and hyperthyroidism (active alternatives).
SBE, HIV, temporal arteritis, and tuberculosis are “must not miss”
alternatives. 
Finally, malabsorption should be reconsidered if the evaluation
is negative, since patients with malabsorption may not have diar-
rhea or foul stools. Table 27–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
Table 27–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs.M.(Continued)
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Cancer
Stomach
Early satiety
EGD or upper GI
Colon
Change in stools
Colonoscopy
Hematochezia
Positive FOBT, iron
deficient anemia
Lung
Cough, hemoptysis
Chest radiograph,
Tobacco use 
chest CT scan 
Pancreas
Abdominal pain
Abdominal 
Jaundice, dark
ultrasound or 
urine (bilirubinuria)
CT scan
Active Alternatives—Most Common 
Nonmalignant
GI disease 
Dental 
New ill-fitting
dentures
Esophageal
Dysphagia
EGD or upper GI
disease
PUD
Epigastric pain, early
EGD
satiety, nausea, melena,
H pylori breath test
NSAID use
or stool antigen
(Continued )
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  445
1
Mrs. M reports no early satiety, nausea, or vomiting. She
reports that she never smoked cigarettes, has no
unusual cough, and has not experienced any episodes of
hemoptysis. She has had no change in her bowel habits or
blood in her stool. She has had dentures for many years
without change. She has not experienced dysphagia,
odynophagia, abdominal pain, jaundice, change in the
color of her urine, and has no history of hepatitis. She
has not noticed any tremulousness, heat intolerance, or
swelling over her thyroid. She denies having any
headaches, fevers, or history of known valvular heart dis-
ease or injection drug use.
On physical exam, Mrs. M looks quite cachectic. She
appears apathetic (Figure 27–2). Her vital signs are
normal. HEENT exam reveals no oral lesions or adenopa-
thy. Lungs are clear to percussion and auscultation. Car-
diac exam reveals a regular rate and rhythm, with a grade
I-II flow systolic murmur along the left sternal border. Her
abdomen is scaphoid, without hepatosplenomegaly or
mass. Rectal exam reveals guaiac-negative stool. Neuro-
logic exam is normal, including a Mini-Mental State Exam.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not what other information
do you need?
Table 27–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. M. (Continued)
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Active Alternatives—Most Common 
Chronic
Epigastric pain,
Calcification on
pancreatitis
History of alcohol use
plain abdominal
or acute pancreatitis
films or CT scan,
lipase, fecal fat stain
Hepatitis
Alcohol use, injection
AST, ALT, bilirubin
drug use, jaundice
IBD 
Diarrhea, hematochezia,
Colonoscopy
anemia, + FOBT, family
history of IBD
Psychosocial
Depression
History of loss, personal
Complaints of 
or family history of
feeling down or
depression, postpartum
anhedonia
state,
> 6 somatic symptoms,
overestimation of
weight loss
Alcoholism 
Quantity of alcohol use
Alcohol screen
Family or work-related
problems
Family history of
alcoholism
Elevated AST and MCV
Resistant hypertension
Hyperthyroidism
Increased sweating
TSH
Nervousness
Goiter
Tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation
Lid lag or retraction
Fine tremor 
Hyperactive reflexes
Exophthalmos
Frightened stare
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
HIV
Fevers,
HIV 
lymphadenopathy,
recurrent pneumonias
History of high-risk
sexual contacts,
sexually transmitted
disease, or injection 
drug use
Subacute
History of valvular heart
Blood cultures
bacterial
disease, fevers, murmur
ESR,TEE
endocarditis
Temporal
Proximal muscle 
ESR
arteritis
soreness
Temporal artery 
Headache
biopsy
Visual loss
Temporal artery
tenderness
Jaw claudication
Tuberculosis
Fever, cough,
PPD, γ interferon
hemoptysis,
Chest radiograph
foreign born,
exposure
Figure 27–2. Mrs.M.(Reproduced, with permission from Thomas
FB et al. Ann Intern Med. 1970;72:679–685.)
446 /  CHAPTER 27
Mrs. M’s history and physical exam do not clearly point to a spe-
cific disease process. There are no clues to suggest a GI disorder or
a particular systemic disease. Given her cachectic appearance, your
primary concern is that she has an underlying malignancy. Her
apparent apathy also raises the possibility of depression. Hyper-
thyroidism seems unlikely given her sluggish demeanor. 
Leading Hypothesis: Cancer Cachexia
Textbook Presentation 
Patients with cancer cachexia often have advanced disease. They
suffer from anorexia, fatigue, and other symptoms specific to their
particular malignancy. The cancer may have been diagnosed before
the weight loss or the weight loss may lead to the diagnosis. 
Disease Highlights
A. Cancer diagnoses account for ≈25% of cases of unexplained
weight loss.
B. The most common malignancies associated with weight loss
are GI, lung, and lymphoma.
C. Weight loss is 1 of the most common presenting symptoms in
patients with lung cancer (comparable to cough). It is more
frequent than dyspnea, hemoptysis, or chest pain.
D. IWL is common in cancer patients. At the time of diagnosis,
24% of patients with cancer have lost weight.
E. Patients with IWL due to cancer have a higher 2-year mortality
than patients with IWL due to unknown causes (62% vs 18%). 
F. Weight loss increases the risk of immobility, deconditioning,
and adversely affects immunity. The risk of pulmonary
embolism, decubitus ulcers, and pneumonia are increased.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis 
A. Several studies have evaluated a battery of history, physical
exam, and initial laboratory studies to aid in the detection of
cancer in patients with IWL. 
B. Laboratory studies usually included a CBC, chemical survey
(including glucose, calcium, BUN, creatinine, and liver func-
tion tests), HIV when appropriate, ESR, TSH, urinalysis, and
chest radiograph. Several of these studies also incorporated
abdominal ultrasound. 
C. Further work-up was dictated by abnormalities detected in
the initial battery. (For instance, GI evaluation with
endoscopy and colonoscopy would be initiated in patients
with GI complaints or iron deficiency anemia; hepatobiliary
and pancreatic imaging would be done in those with abdom-
inal pain or abnormal liver function tests, etc).
1. Cancer was detected in 28% of patients in these studies.
2. The battery was 93% sensitive for the detection of cancer
in patients with IWL.
3. Occult cancer was diagnosed in only 2.6% of patients
with a negative battery and evaluation.
Treatment
A. Nutritional support
1. In many patients, artificial nutritional support is not effective. 
2. Certain subgroups of patients may benefit from nutri-
tional support. 
a. Head and neck cancer (after radiation therapy)
b. Bowel obstruction 
c. Surgery patients (particularly upper GI tract cancer)
d. Patients receiving high-dose chemotherapy 
e. Enteral support is appropriate if the bowel is functional
and always preferred if feasible 
B. Treat underlying malignancy
C. Medroxyprogesterone and megestrol
1. Decreases nausea and anorexia and increases weight gain
2. May increase the risk of thromboembolic events. 
3. Other side effects include hyperglycemia, endometrial bleed-
ing, edema, hypertension, and adrenal suppression and
insufficiency. 
D. Corticosteroids 
1. Decrease anorexia and nausea 
2. Increase appetite, quality of life, and feeling of well-being 
3. Because of the side effects, corticosteroids are often reserved
for patients with terminal disease. 
E. A variety of other medications have been tried with limited to
no success. 
1. Prokinetic drugs (metoclopramide) can decrease anorexia
and nausea but did not increase appetite or caloric intake.
2. The cannabinoid dronabinol was less effective than progestins. 
3. Other agents under study include gherlin, melatonin, ATP
infusions, and oxandrolone. 
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Clearly, a diagnosis is not yet apparent on history or physical
exam. The data suggest that when the cause of IWL is malignant,
there are usually clues on history, physical exam, or on laboratory
testing. You elect to check a CBC, liver panel, renal panel, urinal-
ysis, chest radiograph, and screening mammogram. Finally, you
elect to schedule Mrs. M for a colonoscopy, since she has never
undergone colon cancer screening.
1
Surprisingly, Mrs. M’s laboratory evaluation is strikingly
normal. Her CBC is normal without evidence of iron defi-
ciency anemia (which could have suggested gastric or colon
cancer). The chest radiograph is also normal, making lung
cancer unlikely, particularly in a patient who never smoked.
ALT (SGPT), AST (SGOT), alkaline phosphatase, and biliru-
bin are normal (an elevation can suggest hepatic metasta-
sis or obstruction due to pancreatic cancer), and her renal
panel is normal. There was no hematuria on urinalysis (which
could suggest renal cell carcinoma or bladder cancer). Her
mammogram and colonoscopy were normal. 
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, cancer cachexia?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses? 
Alternative Diagnosis: Depression
Textbook Presentation 
Depression may follow a recognizable loss or occur without a clear
precipitant. Classically, patients complain of profound sadness,
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  447
lack of interest in activities (anhedonia), sleep and appetite distur-
bances, impaired concentration, and other symptoms. Patients
may lose or gain weight. Patients may experience suicidal or homi-
cidal thoughts.
Disease Highlights
A. Point prevalence of major depressive disorder (MDD) is
5.4–8.9%. Lifetime prevalence 16.2%. Minor depression is
twice as common.
B. Depression is the second most common condition seen in pri-
mary care practices and the fourth leading cause of disability.
C. Recurrences are common. Many patients require lifelong therapy.
D. Risk factors for major depression
1. Prior episode of depression
2. Postpartum period
3. Comorbid medical illness
4. Older age (including concomitant neurologic disease)
5. Chronic pain
6. Absence of social support 
7. Female sex (2–3 times more common than in males)
8. Family history (first-degree relative)
9. Stressful life events
10. Substance abuse
E. Associated anxiety: 50% of patients have anxiety symptoms
1. 10–20% of patients with MDD have evidence of panic
disorder and 30–40% have evidence of generalized anxiety
disorder.
2. Patients with anxiety and MDD are at higher risk for suicide.
F. Minor depression 
1. 10–18% progress to major depression within 1 year. 
2. 20% have moderate to severe disability.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Criteria for MDD requires 5 of the following (1 of which is
depressed mood or anhedonia) for at least 2 weeks: 
1. Depressed mood 
2. Anhedonia 
3. Significant appetite or weight change 
4. Sleep disturbance 
5. Psychomotor agitation or retardation 
6. Fatigue 
7. Feelings of worthlessness 
8. Impaired concentration 
9. Suicidal ideation 
B. Minor depression requires 2–4 of the above symptoms,
including anhedonia or depressed mood for > 2 weeks. 
C. Depression is often missed on routine evaluation. In patients
in whom depression was subsequently diagnosed, only 8.8%
were found to be depressed during routine interview.
D. Screening tools increase identification of patients with depres-
sion by 2- to 3-fold (an absolute increase of 10–47%) and are
recommended by the US Preventive Services Task Force.
E. 2 screening questions perform well (a positive response to
either question is considered positive). 
1. “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt down, depressed, or
hopeless?” 
2. “Over the past 2 weeks, have you felt little interest or
pleasure in doing things?”
3. Sensitivity, 96%; specificity, 57%; LR+, 2.2; LR−, 0.07) 
4. Patients with a positive response to either question should
undergo a full evaluation.
F. Clinical clues that might suggest a patient is depressed include
1. Recent stress or loss
2. Chronic medical illness, chronic pain syndromes
3. > 6 physical symptoms 
4. Higher patient ratings of symptom severity
5. Lower patient rating of overall health
6. Physician perception of encounter as difficult
7. Substance abuse (23% have MDD)
8. Overestimation of weight loss 
a. In patients who overestimated their weight loss (by
more than .5 kg), cancer was unlikely (6%) and no
organic cause was found in 73%. 
b. In patients who underestimated their weight loss (by
more than 1 kg), cancer was diagnosed in 52%.
9. The patient appears more functionally restricted than
explained by their medical illness.
10. The language used to describe their condition is extreme
(terrible, unbearable, etc). 
11. Sleep disturbances
G. Even in patients with depression, care must be taken before
ascribing weight loss solely to depression. Many medical ill-
nesses that cause weight loss are also associated with depres-
sion (eg, 20–45% of patients with cancer are depressed, and
40% of patients with Parkinson disease are depressed). 
The diagnosis of depression does not exclude other
serious illnesses causing IWL. Patients should be
monitored to ensure weight gain following treat-
ment of their depression.
Treatment
A. Work-up should include a full psychosocial history, including
degree of functional impairment, history of domestic vio-
lence, and a drug history to look for agents that can worsen
or precipitate depression (alcohol, interferon, L-dopa, gluco-
corticoids, oral contraceptives, propranolol, cocaine). 
B. Patients should be screened for a history of manic symptoms
that suggest bipolar illness (periods of reduced need for sleep,
impulsivity, euphoric mood, racing thoughts, increased sexual
activity, and grandiosity). 
C. Screening tests (ie, TSH, basic metabolic panel, liver function
tests, CBC) are recommended to rule out medical conditions
(eg, hypothyroidism) that can simulate or cause depression.
D. Assess suicide risk: Ideation, intent, or plan
1. Have you been having thoughts of dying?
2. Do you have a plan?
3. Does patient have the means (eg, weapons) to succeed?
4. Other risk factors include
a. Older men 
b. Psychotic symptoms
448 /  CHAPTER 27
c. Alcohol or illicit substance abuse
d. History of prior attempts
e. Family history of suicide or recent exposure to suicide
5. Risk factors for suicide attempts in blacks included young
age (OR 9.4), less than high school education (OR 3.6),
mood disorder (OR 3.8), anxiety disorder (OR 6.0), and
substance abuse (OR 4.5).
6. Emergent psychiatric evaluation should be performed in
patients with risk factors for suicide, who appear intoxicated,
who cannot contract for safety, or have poor social support.
E. Pharmacotherapy
1. Based on a number of symptoms and functional
impairment
2. Not influenced by whether or not there is well-defined
precipitant (ie, stress). Therapy should be strongly con-
sidered in grieving patients with persistent symptoms of
MDD for more than 2 months after a loss.
3. Multiple classes of medications are effective; selective serotonin
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), serotonin and norepinephrine
reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs), tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs), and monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
4. SSRIs are often used as first-line agents due to low fre-
quency of adverse effects and safety in overdose. SSRIs
and SNRIs may cause sexual dysfunction. Venlafaxine
(an SNRI) can be lethal in overdose.
5. Mirtazapine may be useful in patients with weight loss
and insomnia and bupropion may be useful in patients
with daytime lethargy and fatigue.
6. TCAs frequently cause troubling anticholinergic side
effects, significant weight gain (> 20 lbs) and are danger-
ous in overdose so are used less often. High-dose TCAs
may increase the risk of sudden cardiac death. 
7. MAOIs interact with a variety of tyramine-containing
foods and medications and may precipitate a hypertensive
crisis. These are typically prescribed only by psychiatrists.
8. Patients with a prior history of manic symptoms should
be referred for psychiatric evaluation prior to the institu-
tion of antidepressant therapy. Antidepressant therapy
can trigger mania. 
9. Treat for 6–9 months after clinical recovery. 
10. Patients with multiple recurrences (≥2–3) may require
lifetime therapy.
F. Psychotherapy 
1. Equally effective as pharmacotherapy in patients with
mild to moderate depression. Options include cognitive
behavioral therapy, problem solving therapy, and interper-
sonal psychotherapy.
2. Less effective than pharmacotherapy in patients with
severe depression. Combined psychotherapy and pharma-
cotherapy may be the best option.
G. Exercise programs may be helpful in older adults with mild to
moderate depression.
H. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an alternative therapy for
patients with severe, refractory depression, particularly those
with psychotic or suicidal features. 
I. Indications for referral include psychotic features, substance
abuse, panic disorder, agitated depression, severe depression,
bipolar features, suicidality, relapsing depression, dysthymia.
1
Mrs. M reports no unusual stresses or losses. She has
been widowed for 15 years and feels that she has come
to terms with her husband’s death. She lives with her
daughter and regularly sees family members and remains
actively involved in her church. She denies feeling down,
depressed or hopeless in the last month and denies loss
of interest or pleasure in doing things.
Mrs. M’s answers to the screening questions make depression
highly unlikely (LR−0.07). Although her appearance seems anti-
thetical to hyperthyroidism, you wonder if that possibility should
be pursued. 
Alternative Diagnosis: Hyperthyroidism
Textbook Presentation 
Classically, patients with hyperthyroidism present with a myriad
of symptoms and signs obvious to the experienced observer.
Symptoms include palpitations, heat intolerance, increased sweat-
ing, insomnia, tremulousness, diarrhea, and weight loss. Signs of
hyperthyroidism include sinus tachycardia, systolic hypertension,
frightened stare, an enlarged goiter, a fine resting tremor, and
exophthalmos (only if hyperthyroidism is secondary to Graves dis-
ease). Exophthalmos may be unilateral or bilateral. Other mani-
festations may include hyperpigmentation, irregular menses, pru-
ritus, and thinning of hair. Complications include osteoporosis,
tracheal obstruction (from the goiter), tachyarrhythmias (particu-
larly atrial fibrillation), high output heart failure, anemia, and
proximal muscle weakness. 
Disease Highlights 
A. Prevalence, 0.3%. 
B. Hyperthyroidism is actually an endocrine syndrome caused
by several distinct pathophysiologic entities (Table 27–2).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. Certain findings of hyperthyroidism are quite specific (ie,
lid lag and lid retraction) and help rule in the diagnosis
(specificity, 99%; LR+, 17–32).
2. Clinical findings are not highly sensitive. Therefore, absent
clinical findings do not allow hyperthyroidism to be ruled out. 
a. Goiter is present in 70–93% of cases.
b. HR > 90 bpm is present in 80% of cases. 
c. Lid lag is present in 19% of cases.
d. Ophthalmopathy is present in 25–50% of patients
with Graves disease.
e. Hyperreflexia is variable depending on the age of the
patient (see below).
B. Elderly patients
1. Prevalence of hyperthyroidism in elderly is 2–3%.
2. Hyperthyroidism often presents atypically in elderly
patients. Expected adrenergic findings are often absent,
whereas atrial fibrillation, depression, and weight loss
are more common, resulting in the phenomenon
referred to as apathetic hyperthyroidism of elderly.
FP
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  449
Table 27–3 compares the findings in young and older
patients with hyperthyroidism.
Consider hyperthyroidism in elderly patients with
weight loss (OR 8.7), tachycardia (OR 11.2), atrial fib-
rillation, or apathy (OR 14.8). Hyperthyroidism was
not even considered in 54% of admitted patients in
whom hyperthyroidism was subsequently diagnosed. 
C. Laboratory tests
1. TSH is the test of choice (in the absence of pituitary disease)
(sensitivity > 99%, specificity > 99%, LR+ > 99, LR−< .01).
a. Low TSH indicates hyperthyroidism.
b. Normal TSH indicates euthyroidism.
c. High TSH indicates hypothyroidism. 
2. Exception occurs when the pituitary itself is diseased (rare).
a. Pituitary adenomas can produce TSH causing hyper-
thyroidism with increased TSH and FTI. 
b. Pituitary destruction (eg, sarcoidosis) results in hypothy-
roidism with decreased TSH and FTI. 
3. T4 measurements
a. Thyroid hormone exists in the serum bound to thyroid-
binding globulin (TBG) and free
b. Free T4 (FT4) is active and more accurately reflects
thyroid activity than the total T4.
c. The FTI estimates the FT4.
d. Many conditions alter the TBG and total T4. However,
they do not affect the FT4 level (or FTI), and patients
remain euthyroid. (For example, pregnancy raises the
TBG and total T4; however, the FT4 and FTI are nor-
mal and the patient is euthyroid.) 
4. Occasionally, patients with hyperthyroidism have isolated
elevations in T3, or T3 thyrotoxicosis. In such patients,
the TSH is still suppressed. 
5. An approach to thyroid function tests is shown in
Figure 27–3.
6. Established hyperthyroidism
a. Certain features can help distinguish the etiology of hyper-
thyroidism, including thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin
and radioactive iodine uptake scan (see Table 27–2). 
Table 27–2. Distinguishing features of several hyperthyroid states.
Disease
Pathogenesis/Important features
TSH
T4, FTI or T3
Thyroid Scan and Other Tests
Graves disease
Autoimmune production of thyroid-stimulating
↓
↑
Homogenously increased uptake
antibody binds and stimulates TSH receptor 
Elevated TSI 
Exophthalmos unique to Graves 
Toxic
Most common form in elderly 
↓
↑
Patchy increased uptake
multinodular goiter
Painful subacute
Viral or immune inflammatory attack on thyroid resulting
↓
↑
Decreased uptake
thyroiditis
in neck pain, tenderness, fever and release of hormone
Elevated ESR
Toxic adenoma
Autonomously functioning benign thyroid nodule
↓
↑
Hot nodule, uptake in rest of 
gland is suppressed
Iodine or amiodarone
Amiodarone1 may cause the release of T4 and T3
↓
↑
Usually decreased uptake 
TSH-producing 
Autonomously functioning benign pituitary adenoma
↑
↑
Diffusely increased uptake 
pituitary adenoma
May cause bitemporal hemianopsia
Galactorrhea develops in 33% of women 
Factitious or
Self or physician induced
↓
↑
Decreased uptake
iatrogenic
T4/FTI more elevated than T3
Thyroglobulin concentration low
1Amiodarone causes hypothyroidism in 20% of patients by impairing conversion of T4 to T3.
ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate; FTI, free thyroxine index; TSI, thyroid-stimulating immunoglobin.
Table 27–3. Sensitivity of findings in patients with
hyperthyroidism.
Patients Aged   
Patients Aged 
Signs and Symptoms
70 Years or Older
50 Years or Younger
Sinus tachycardia
41%
94%
Atrial fibrillation
35–54%
2%
Fatigue
56%
84%
Anorexia
32–50%
4%
Weight loss
50–85%
51–73%
Goiter
50%
94%
Ophthalmopathy
6%
46%
Tremor
44–71%
84–96%
Nervousness
31%
84%
Hyperactive reflexes
28%
96%
Increased sweating
24–66%
92–95%
Heat intolerance
15%
92%
450 /  CHAPTER 27
b. Doppler flow can be useful in patients unable to
undergo the radioactive uptake scan. Increased flow
correlates with increased uptake.
c. Women of child-bearing years should have a pregnancy test
performed prior to iodine scanning or instituting therapy. 
d. Imaging with ultrasound or occasionally CT scan or
MRI can be useful in patients with large goiters, par-
ticularly if there is a suggestion of airway obstruction. 
Treatment
A. β-Blockers can be used to decrease the sympathetic stimula-
tion and the tremor, palpitations, and sweating.
B. Definitive treatment of hyperthyroidism depends on underly-
ing etiology.
1. Graves disease
a. Antithyroid drugs (methimazole and propylthiouracil)
(1) May cause agranulocytosis (0.1–0.3%)
(2) ≈40% of patients relapse 
b. Radioactive iodine 
(1) Used successfully for over 60 years. 
(2) ≈21% relapse rate
(3) Patients usually require subsequent lifelong thy-
roid hormone replacement because the radioactive
iodine induces hypothyroidism.
c. Surgery is occasionally used, particularly if the goiter is
troublesome. 
2. Toxic multinodular goiter
a. Elderly: Consider radioactive iodine; monitor for
hypothyroidism.
b. Large goiter: Consider surgery. 
3. Subacute thyroiditis 
a. Aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs) decrease thyroid inflammation. 
b. β-Blockers decrease symptoms of hyperthyroidism until
inflammation subsides. 
c. Prednisone and ipodate can be used in severe cases. 
CASE RESOLUTION
1
A TSH on Mrs. M is completely suppressed (< 0.1 mcU/mL).
The T4 is elevated at 20 mcg/dL (nl 5–11.6) and the FTI is
22 (nl 6–10.5). You diagnose hyperthyroidism. A thyroid
scan reveals heterogeneous uptake consistent with a toxic
multinodular goiter. 
Check the TSH on every patient evaluated for
weight loss. 
TSH
High
Usually euthyroid
Normal
High
Secondary or tertiary
hyperthyroidism
Subclinical
hypothyroidism
Low
Overt
hypothyroidism
High
T3 thyrotoxicosis
Normal
Subclinical
hyperthyroidism
Low
Low
Normal
High
Hyperthyroidism
Secondary or tertiary
hypothyroidism
Non-thyroidal illness
Normal
T3
FT4
FT4
Figure 27–3. Diagnosis of thyroid function disorders. (Reproduced, with permission, from Muller AF. Thyroid
function disorders. Neth J Med. 2008;66(3):134–42.)
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  451
1
Due to her advanced age, you elect to have her treated
with radioactive iodine. Six months later she returns; she 
is taking replacement levothyroxine for the radioactive
iodine–induced hypothyroidism. Laboratory exam reveals
that she is euthyroid. She complains that her clothes
are now too tight.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
2
Mr. O is a 55-year-old man who complains of weight loss.
He reports that he has tried for years to lose weight
(unsuccessfully) but that recently he has lost more and
more weight without effort. He was initially pleased but
recently has become concerned. He reports that alto-
gether he has lost 30 pounds in the last 6 months (from
200 lbs to 170 lbs).
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
As noted above the first pivotal step in the evaluation of IWL is to
verify the weight loss. Mr. O has clearly suffered from verifiable
significant IWL. The second pivotal step in the evaluation of
patients with documented weight loss is to determine whether or
not the patient is having symptoms that suggest diarrhea or mal-
absorption. 
2
Mr. O reports no diarrhea, large foul-smelling stools, or
difficult to flush stools. He reports that he previously
moved his bowels once a day but lately only once every
other day. He attributes this to his decreased appetite. 
Since Mr. O’s weight loss is not clearly secondary to malabsorption
or diarrhea, the focus turns to the third pivotal step, which takes a
system-based approach and utilizes a comprehensive history, phys-
ical exam, and basic laboratory studies to look for clues.
2
Mr. O notes that he has a decreased appetite and feels
full quickly after starting to eat. He has not noticed any
melena or hematochezia or any jaundice. He has never
been a tobacco smoker. He denies night sweats or swollen
lymph nodes. He denies any dysphagia or odynophagia
but does admit to NSAID use. He reports that he takes 
600 mg of ibuprofen 2–3 times a day for his arthritis. He
denies any abdominal pain. He reports that he has not
felt down, depressed, or hopeless during the past month
nor has he been bothered by a lack of interest in activi-
ties. He drinks 2 beers about once a month. Finally, he
denies symptoms associated with a variety of systemic
diseases including fevers, muscle aches, or headaches. 
Physical exam reveals a thin but otherwise healthy
appearing middle-aged man. Vital signs are normal. The
remainder of his exam is completely normal.
Laboratory tests, including CBC, differential, hepatic
panel, renal panel, urinalysis, ESR, and TSH, are normal. A
chest radiograph is normal without mass or adenopathy.
The cause of Mr. O’s weight loss is not obvious. However, his early
satiety and NSAID use are clues that he might have PUD or gas-
tric cancer. You consider PUD your leading hypothesis. Gastric
cancer is an alternative hypothesis, and colon cancer is a must not
miss hypothesis given his change in bowel habits. Table 27–4 lists
the differential diagnosis.
All medications (prescription and over the counter)
should be carefully scrutinized in patients com-
plaining of IWL. Some medications cause anorexia
directly, others through various organ toxicities.
Table 27–4. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. O.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
PUD
Epigastric pain, early
EGD
satiety, nausea, melena,
H pylori breath test or
NSAID use
stool antigen
Active Alternatives—Most Common 
Stomach cancer
Early satiety
EGD or upper GI
Active Alternatives—Must Not Miss
Colon cancer
Change in stools
Colonoscopy
Hematochezia
Positive FOBT, iron
deficient anemia
452 /  CHAPTER 27
Colon cancer causing subtotal obstruction may
present a change in bowel habits, either constipa-
tion or diarrhea. 
Is the clinical information sufficient to make a
diagnosis? If not what other information do
you need?
Leading Hypothesis: PUD
Textbook Presentation
The pain of PUD is classically described as a dull or hunger-like
pain in the epigastrium that is either exacerbated or improved by
food intake. The pain is often worse on waking and may radiate
to the back. Symptomatic periods often last for several weeks.
Nausea and early satiety may be seen.
Disease Highlights
A. 250,000 cases per year in the United States
B. Etiology: Most ulcers are secondary to NSAID use, Heli-
cobacter pylori infection or both.
1. H pylori infection
a. Asymptomatic in 70% of patients
b. Peptic ulcer develops in 15% of infected patients. 
c. May cause duodenal or gastric ulcers. Gastric ulcers are
also associated with diffuse gastritis, and rarely, gastric
cancer. 
2. NSAIDs
a. 25% of all adverse drug reactions involve NSAIDs
b. 16,500 deaths/year from NSAID-associated GI bleeding 
c. Gastric ulcers 5 times more common than duodenal
ulcers. 
d. Ulcers are visible on esophagogastroduodenoscopy
(EGD) in 20% of NSAID users, dyspepsia occurs in
10%, hospitalizations in 0.5%, and deaths in 0.15%. 
e. Ulcers are most likely in the first 1–3 months of
NSAID use.
f. Factors that increase the risk of NSAID-associated ulcers
or their complications include concurrent warfarin use
(10×), high-dose NSAIDs (10×), age > 60 (4–6×),
concurrent glucocorticoid use (4–5×), H pylori infec-
tion (3.3×), and nonselective NSAIDs. 
g. NSAIDS may be nonselective, inhibiting both
cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 and COX-2, or selective,
inhibiting only COX-2. 
(1) Selective COX-2 inhibitors have less GI toxicity.
(2) However, several selective COX-2 inhibitors
increase the risk of adverse cardiovascular outcomes
(ie, myocardial infarction) and several have been
withdrawn from the market. Celecoxib is still
available.
(3) Alternate strategies to decrease the risk of NSAID-
related PUD include concurrent use of proton
pump inhibitors (PPIs) with nonselective NSAIDS
(see below). 
3. Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is a rare cause of PUD.
C. Complications: Bleeding can vary from massive hemorrhage (with
hematemesis and melena or hematochezia) to occult GI blood
loss and iron deficiency anemia (see Chapter 17, GI Bleeding).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. History and physical exam
1. Pain is not a good predictor of PUD. 
a. Ulcers are often asymptomatic.
(1) 60% of NSAID-associated ulcers are asymptomatic.
(2) 25% of non-NSAID ulcers are asymptomatic.
b. Pain often reflects nonulcer dyspepsia rather than PUD. 
(1) Less than one-third of patients with epigastric dis-
comfort have PUD.
(2) Among patients undergoing endoscopy, patients
with nonulcer dyspepsia have more severe and more
numerous symptoms than patients with PUD.
c. Surprisingly, several clinical predictors are not good at
discriminating ulcer from nonulcer dyspepsia including 
(1) Response to antisecretory therapy 
(2) Epigastric tenderness 
(3) The quality of the pain
2. Best predictors of PUD are a history of NSAID use and
H pylori infection (Table 27–5).
3. First sign of ulcer may be life-threatening complication
(hemorrhage or perforation): > 50% of patients with serious
to life-threatening complication had no prior symptom.
4. IWL may be a sign of a benign gastric ulcer.
a. 31–55% of patients with benign gastric ulcer noted
weight loss.
b. ∼50% lost 10–20 lbs; 21% lost > 20 lb
c. PUD is found more often in patients undergoing EGD
for weight loss than for dyspepsia.
A significant number of patients with NSAID-
induced ulcers do not experience pain. Anemia,
GI bleeding, early satiety, or weight loss can be the
only symptom of PUD.
B. Laboratory studies
1. H pylori testing
a. Eradication markedly decreases recurrence from
60–100% to < 10%. All patients with documented
PUD, whether or not they are taking NSAIDs, should
be tested for H pylori.
b. Patients with a prior history of PUD who have not pre-
viously been treated for H pylori should also be tested.
Table 27–5. Prevalence of PUD in patients with dyspepsia.
Neither H pylori
Current 
H pylori 
Age
nor NSAIDs
NSAID use
infection
40 years
1%
5%
20%
75 years
3%
20%
30%
NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PUD, peptic ulcer disease.
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  453
c. Testing for H pylori is also recommended for patients
with dyspepsia. Eradication of H pylori is recom-
mended in symptomatic patients. (EGD is only rec-
ommended for those with “alarm” symptoms (see
below) or those who do not respond to therapy.) 
d. Options for diagnosing H pylori infection include inva-
sive and noninvasive testing (Table 27–6).
(1) Urea breath tests and H pylori stool antigen are
preferred in patients not undergoing EGD.
(2) Rapid urease test and histology are preferred in
patients undergoing EGD.
(3) Serology does not distinguish active from prior
infection.
(4) Active bleeding from PUD decreases the sensitiv-
ity of rapid urease tests. Patients with bleeding and
negative rapid urease tests and negative histology
should undergo urea breath tests several weeks
after completing PPI therapy. 
e. Stool antigen, breath test, or the rapid urease can also
assess eradication.
f. PPI therapy for even 1 day markedly decreases the sen-
sitivity of histology, rapid urease test, stool antigen test,
and urea breath test. Serology is not affected but can-
not distinguish active from prior infection.
2. Ulcer diagnosis
a. EGD is more sensitive than upper GI series (92% vs
54%) and is useful to rule out other serious pathology. 
b. Indications for EGD (Figure 27–4)
(1) Bleeding
(2) Anemia
(3) Weight loss
(4) Early satiety
(5) Dysphagia
(6) Recurrent vomiting 
(7) Prior esophagogastric malignancy or family history
of GI cancer 
(8) Patients who do not respond to initial therapy 
(9) Age > 55 years
Treatment
A. The 3 components of therapy for PUD include eradication of
H pylori, if present; discontinuation of NSAIDs, if possible;
and use of proton pump inhibitors. In addition, gastric ulcers
warrant biopsy to rule out adenocarcinoma.
B. Regardless of the cause of the ulcer, and the presence or
absence of bleeding, PPIs dramatically suppress acid secre-
tion and are the mainstay of therapy. For patients infected
with H pylori, PPIs are given during the course of antibiotics
therapy and longer for larger ulcers (> 1- 2 cm) or patients
with complications. 
C. H pylori eradication
1. Regimens require multiple simultaneous medications
using a PPI and usually 2 or 3 distinct antibiotics. Recent
evidence suggests the sequential use of antibiotics increases
the eradication rate. (Amoxicillin with a PPI followed by
clarithromycin, 5-nitroimidazole and a PPI.)
2. Increased incidence of H pylori resistance has led to the
recommendation for posttreatment testing to confirm
eradication. Appropriate tests would include the stool
antigen or urea breath tests 4–6 weeks after completing
therapy.
D. NSAID-associated ulcers
1. Prevention: Consensus guidelines suggest prophylactic
PPIs for patients who are at high risk for PUD on NSAID
therapy. Patients who should receive prophylactic therapy
include those receiving
a. Dual antiplatelet therapy ie, aspirin (any dose) with
any NSAID (nonselective, COX-2 selective or over the
counter) or clopidogrel
b. Antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy
c. Antiplatelet therapy with a history of PUD
d. Antiplatelet therapy with ≥1 of the following risk fac-
tors: aged over 60 years, corticosteroid use, dyspepsia,
or GERD symptoms. 
2. Documented ulcers
a. Test for H pylori infection and eradicate if present.
b. Strategies for patients who require continuation of
NSAIDS (even low-dose aspirin) should include:
(1) Continue PPI therapy for duration of NSAID (even
after H pylori eradication). (H2-receptor blockers are
ineffective.)
(2) Minimize dose and duration of NSAIDs
(3) Avoid certain high-risk nonselective NSAIDS, such
as ketorolac, piroxicam, indomethacin, diclofenac,
and naproxen, all of which increase the relative risk
of PUD.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Despite the absence of pain, Mr. O’s history of NSAID use, the
early satiety, and weight loss convinces you to order an EGD.
2
The EGD reveals 2 gastric ulcers 1.5 cm in size. Pathology
reveals organisms consistent with H pylori.
Table 27–6. Test characteristics for detecting Helicobacter
pylori infection.
Sensitivity 
Specificity
Test
(%)
(%)
LR+
LR−
Invasive tests
Rapid urease test
67
93
9.8
0.35
Histology
70
90
7
0.33
Culture
45
98
22.5
0.56
Noninvasive tests
Urea breath test
93
92
11.6
0.08
Stool antigen
87
70
2.9
0.2
Serology
88
69
2.8
0.2
454 /  CHAPTER 27
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, gastric ulcer? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alterna-
tive diagnoses? 
You conclude that the likely cause of Mr. O’s weight loss is gastric
ulcer. You elect to initiate therapy without further testing. 
Altogether, malignant and nonmalignant GI dis-
eases are the cause of IWL in 28% of patients. The
yield of EGD in patients with IWL is 12–44%.
EGD should be considered in the evaluation of
patients with unexplained weight loss.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
Mr. O received eradication therapy, a PPI, and stopped
the ibuprofen. Three months later, his appetite is excel-
lent. He is advised to use acetaminophen for his arthri-
tis pain and to perform nonimpact physical activities. 
Dyspepsia
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
NSAID
use?
Ulcer?
EGD
Test H pylori
(Rapid urease or histology)
Eradicate if positive.
Initiate PPI
Test H pylori
(Breath test or stool antigen)
Eradicate if positive
If NSAIDs necessary, continue PPI
EGD, esophago gastro duodenoscopy; NSAID, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug; PPI, proton pump inhibitor.
Check H pylori
serology
EGD
Ulcer?
PPI for 4–8 weeks
Consider EGD if
symptoms recur
Symptoms
resolve?
Stop NSAID.
Initiate PPI.
Check H pylori
(–)
(+)
PPI for 4–8 weeks
Consider EGD if
symptoms recur
Eradicate H pylori
Can
NSAIDs be safely
discontinued?
• Hemorrhage
• Anemia
• Weight loss
• Early satiety
• New onset over age 55
• Dysphagia
• Recurrent vomiting
Risk factors for serious disease
Figure 27–4. Indications for EGD.
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  455
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
3
Mr. A. is a 62-year-old man who complains of recent
weight loss. He reports that he has lost 15 pounds over
the last 6–9 months, and that his clothes no longer fit.
He denies diarrhea but admits to abdominal bloating and
having several large stools a day that are difficult to
flush. He reports that his appetite is not what it used to
be but attributes that to his recent separation from his
wife. He confides that they have not gotten along for
years. She seemed to blame everything on his drinking,
but he assures you that alcohol was definitely not a
problem. Further, he reports that he is glad she is out of
his life. 
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The first step in IWL is to verify Mr. A’s weight loss. This is clearly
established by his history and a review of his medical records. The
second and third steps look for signs of malabsorption and clues
from the history and physical exam. Mr. A’s social history raises
several possibilities. First, you suspect that his drinking is a prob-
lem and might be contributing to his weight loss. Alternatively, he
may be more depressed than he acknowledges or simply adjusting
to lifestyle changes precipitated by his separation. Finally,
although he denies frank diarrhea, his large frequent stools raise
the possibility of some form of malabsorption. Table 27–7 lists the
differential diagnosis.
3
On further questioning, Mr. A reports that he drinks 2 or
so alcoholic beverages a night. He proudly states that he
has never missed work due to a hangover and never
drinks before noon. When you ask him how much alcohol he
uses in each drink and whether anyone else has com-
mented on his drinking, he gets defensive and reminds
you he is here because he is losing weight.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Mr. A’s defensiveness increases your suspicion of alcoholism. You
wonder how much alcohol consumption is normal and how to
screen him more thoroughly for alcoholism. 
Table 27–7. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. A.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Alcoholism
Quantity of alcohol use
Alcohol screen
Family or work-related
Elevated AST or
problems
MCV
Injury
Family history of alcoholism
Resistant hypertension
Active Alternatives—Most Common
Depression
History of loss, personal
Admission of feeling
or family history of
down or anhedonia
depression, postpartum
state > 6 somatic 
symptoms
Chronic
Epigastric pain
Calcifications on 
pancreatitis
History of alcohol use or 
radiograph and CT
acute pancreatitis
scan, ERCP
Diarrhea or large difficult
to flush stools
Crohn disease
Diarrhea 
Colonoscopy
Chronic abdominal pain 
Capsule endoscopy
Family history of IBD
pANCA and 
Jewish descent
ASCA antibodies
Vitamin B12 deficiency
Fecal lactoferrin or
Uveitis, erythema nodosum
calprotectin 
Sclerosing cholangitis
Hematochezia, anemia,
rectal abscess, aphthous
ulcers
Polymicrobial urinary
tract infection
Ulcerative
Bloody diarrhea
Colonoscopy
colitis
Family history of IBD
Jewish descent
Uveitis, erythema
nodosum
Sclerosing cholangitis
Bacterial
Diarrhea
Quantitative jejunal
overgrowth
Prior bowel surgery,
aspirates
stricture, blind loop
D-xylose 
Chronic pancreatitis
breath test
Small bowel diverticula
Celiac
Diarrhea 
IgA endomysial Ab
disease 
Family history 
IgA-tGT Ab
Iron deficiency anemia
Neurologic disorders
(ataxia, headaches)
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Chronic
Diarrhea
Stool C difficile toxin
infection
Recent antibiotic use
Stool Giardia antigen
(eg, Clostridium
Hospitalization,
Stool O & P
difficile,Giardia
long-term facility
lamblia,
Fresh water intake
Entamoeba
Travel 
histolytica)
456 /  CHAPTER 27
Leading Hypothesis: Alcoholism
Textbook Presentation 
Alcohol intake varies from low risk use to risky use, problem
drinking, abuse, and finally alcohol dependence. Patients with
alcoholism present along a continuum, from the functioning exec-
utive to the homeless alcoholic. Psychosocial complications
include job loss, marital difficulties, loss of driving license, and
violent behavior. Medical complications may include injury, pan-
creatitis, gastritis, cirrhosis, vitamin deficiency, cardiomyopathy,
hypertension, malnutrition, weight loss, and death. Weight loss
may be multifactorial secondary to decreased caloric intake during
intoxication or due to alcohol-related illnesses (gastritis, pancreati-
tis, cirrhosis). Alcoholism is difficult to recognize early, when
intervention may prevent progression. 
Disease Highlights
A. Alcohol is involved in 40% of all traffic fatalities and 20–37%
of emergency department trauma and responsible for 85,000
deaths per year in the United States. Other causes of alcohol-
related deaths include drownings, suicides, cirrhosis, and an
increased risk of several cancers (esophageal, pharyngeal,
laryngeal, and hepatocellular cancer).
B. Women are more likely to deny alcohol-related problems
and to have associated eating disorders, depression, and
panic disorders.
C. 37% of adults with alcohol abuse or dependence have con-
comitant mood or personality disorders.
D. Categories and definitions of patterns of alcohol use (1 drink
is defined as 12 g of alcohol or 1.5 oz of liquor, 5 oz of wine,
or 12 oz of beer) 
1. Risky use: Prevalence 4–29%
a. Men: > 14 drinks/wk or > 4 drinks per occasion
b. Women: > 7 drinks/wk or > 3 drinks per occasion
c. Persons > 65 years: > 7 drinks/wk or 3 drinks per occasion
2. Hazardous drinking: At risk for consequences from alcohol
3. Alcohol abuse: ≥1 of the following events in 1 year: 
a. Recurrent use resulting in failure to fulfill major role or
obligations 
b. Recurrent use in physically hazardous situations
c. Recurrent alcohol-related legal problems (eg, driving
while intoxicated)
d. Continued use despite social or interpersonal problems
caused by or exacerbated by alcohol
4. Alcohol dependence: Prevalence 2–9%. Defined as ≥3 of
the following events in 1 year: 
a. Tolerance (increased amounts to achieve effect)
b. Withdrawal
c. Alcohol is often taken in larger amounts or over a
longer period than was intended.
d. Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to cut down or
control alcohol use.
e. A great deal of time spent obtaining, using, or recover-
ing from alcohol 
f. Important social, occupational, or recreational activities
are given up or reduced because of alcohol use. 
g. Continued use despite knowledge of a physical or psy-
chological problem caused by or exacerbated by alcohol 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The US Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening
all adults. A variety of clinical clues can suggest alcohol mis-
use including: 
1. Injury 
2. Resistant hypertension 
3. Family, work, or legal problems 
4. Violence 
5. Depression 
6. Substance abuse 
7. Chronic pain 
8. Abnormal liver enzymes 
9. Macrocytosis 
10. Anemia 
11. Thrombocytopenia 
12. Family history of alcoholism
B. Recommendations suggest asking patients about the quantity
of alcohol they ingest as well as the administration of a vali-
dated screening questionnaire.
1. Self-reporting of alcohol ingestion may be inaccurate, par-
ticularly in patients who have recently ingested alcohol
(sensitivity 20–47%). 
2. A variety of validated screening questionnaires exist
including the CAGE, AUDIT, AUDIT-C, and TWEAK
questionnaires.
a. The CAGE questionnaire is easy to remember and fre-
quently used but insensitive for heavy alcohol use.
b. AUDIT (Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test) is
the best validated tool and available online, but it is
lengthy. 
c. The TWEAK questionnaire is the optimal screening
tool in women and the short Michigan Alcohol Screen-
ing Test-Geriatric version is an accurate tool in older
adults.
d. The accuracy of these screening tools and biochemical
abnormalities is shown in Table 27–8.
C. The National Institutes of Health, and National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism recommend screening patients
by asking if in the last year they have consumed 5 or more
drinks in 1 day (4 or more drinks in women). 
1. Alternatively, the AUDIT score can be used. 
2. Patients with a positive response to the single question screen
or men with an AUDIT score of  ≥8 (≥4 for women or men
over age 60) should complete a screening intervention. 
3. The pocket guide to this intervention can be found at http://
pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Practitioner/pocketguide/
pocket_guide.htm
D. Laboratory abnormalities (Table 27–8)
1. A variety of laboratory abnormalities may be seen in
patients with heavy alcohol use, including an elevated GGT
(gamma glutamyl transpeptidase), MCV (mean corpuscular
volume), or CDT (carbohydrate deficient transferrin).
2. Elevated levels may increase the suspicion of alcoholism
but are insensitive and should not be used to rule out the
diagnosis. 
3. The sensitivity increases in patients with alcohol depend-
ency in whom the diagnosis is increasingly obvious. 
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  457
Treatment
A. Components of effective interventions for hazardous drinkers
include:
1. Feedback on clinical assessment
2. Comparison to drinking norms
3. Discussion of the adverse effects of alcohol
4. Statement of the recommended drinking limits
5. Prescription to “Cut down on your drinking”
6. Patient educational material (www.niaaa.nih.gov)
7. Drinking diary
8. Follow-up office sessions and phone contact
B. Physician feedback, discussion, and prescription to cut down
have been demonstrated to reduce drinking (OR 1.95), binge
drinking, hospitalizations, total costs, and mortality. 
C. Patients at moderate to high risk of alcohol withdrawal, a
potentially fatal condition, should be hospitalized in a detox-
ification unit (see Chapter 10, Delirium & Dementia). Other
patients who may benefit from inpatient treatment include
those with concomitant psychiatric disorders (especially suici-
dal ideation) and unstable home environments. 
D. Relapse prevention: Several options
1. Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), a 12-step program
2. Motivational enhancement therapy
3. Therapy to develop cognitive behavioral coping skills.
4. Naltrexone, acamprosate, and disulfiram have reduced
drinking in patients with alcohol dependence. Pharma-
cotherapy is most effective when combined with behavioral
support. Detailed documents that outline clinician support
and include patient education materials are available. 
a. Naltrexone is an opioid antagonist that blunts the pleas-
urable effects of alcohol. 
(1) It can be taken orally or given monthly as a depot
injection. 
(2) Naltrexone should be avoided in patients using opi-
oids and those with acute hepatitis or liver failure. 
b. Acamprosate should not be given to patients who are
actively drinking. It is contraindicated in patients with
severe renal impairment (CrCl < 30 mL/min). 
c. Disulfiram acts as an alcohol deterrent by making patients
sick who consume alcohol while taking disulfiram. 
(1) It is contraindicated in patients who are actively
drinking, patients with coronary artery disease,
and those taking metronidazole. 
(2) Disulfiram can cause hepatic toxicity; liver func-
tion tests should be monitored. 
5. Treatment of depression, if present.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Mr. A’s history of “2 or so” drinks per night suggest at-risk drinking.
Furthermore, his marital separation, while possibly multifactorial,
raises the real possibility of alcohol abuse. You ask Mr. A the screen-
ing question if he has had 5 or more drinks on any day in the last year.
3
Mr. A reports that he probably drinks that much at least
once a month when he is “partying.” 
Mr. A’s intake raises your concern further. You elect to administer
the CAGE questionnaire. 
3
Mr. A reports that he tried to cut down while he was mar-
ried. Since his separation, he no longer feels that restraint.
He admits to feeling annoyed with other family members
Table 27–8. Accuracy of detecting unhealthy drinking using questionnaires and laboratory tests.
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+1
LR–
Questionnaires
CAGE
53–69
81–95
5.1
0.44
AUDIT
51–97
78–96
5.3
0.3
AUDIT-C
86
72
3.1
0.19
(women)
84
85
5.6
0.19
TWEAK
79–87
83–87
5.5
0.2
(women)
Laboratory tests
Increased GGT
65
80
3.3
0.44
CDT
26–60
80–92
3.1
0.66
% CDT
36–66
87–96%
5.1–8.8
0.39–0.66
Macrocytosis
24
96
6
0.79
1LRs are calculated using average values for sensitivity and specificity.
458 /  CHAPTER 27
who have suggested he cut down. (He is certain that his
wife turned them against him.) He denies feeling guilty
about his drinking and has never taken an eye opener. Mr. A
reports that he has always been able to “hold his liquor”
and that 6 drinks in an evening is not uncommon if he is
having fun (tolerance). He acknowledges that occasionally
he hears funny stories about himself from these parties
that he cannot recollect (amnesia). 
Mr. A reluctantly reports that he received 2 tickets
for driving while intoxicated within the past year. He feels
mildly guilty about this but assures you he knows better
than to make that mistake again. He reiterates that he
has never missed work due to his drinking but did miss
several family events because he was “partying.” 
Mr. A has 2 positive responses to the CAGE questionnaire and his
history of driving while intoxicated and missed family engagements
defines his pattern as alcohol abuse. He meets 2 criteria (but not the
necessary 3 criteria) for alcohol dependence (tolerance and missed
engagements). You elect to check a CBC and a liver panel. The
CBC shows macrocytosis and the liver panel shows a mildly elevated
AST and ALT. The elevation in AST is more marked than the ele-
vation in ALT, a pattern commonly seen in alcoholic hepatitis. 
Clearly, Mr. A suffers from alcohol abuse. This may be the sole
cause or a contributing cause of his IWL. You elect to initiate a
treatment plan and reevaluate him once he is abstinent.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
You have a frank discussion of the issues with Mr. A. You
acknowledge that his marital difficulties are complex, but 
that many features of his alcohol use suggest depend-
ence and abuse. The missed family gatherings, alcoholic
blackouts, tolerance, tickets for driving while intoxicated,
and abnormal blood test results all suggest this is a
serious medical problem. Mr. A confides that he is fright-
ened to go “cold turkey.” He feels shaky and agitated
whenever he stops drinking. You suggest admission to a
detoxification unit. Mr. A listens carefully and agrees to
be admitted.
FOLLOW-UP OF MR. A
3
Two months later, Mr. A returns to your office. His mood
is clearly better. He proudly reports that he is “on the
wagon” and feeling better. He attends AA meetings
5–7 nights per week. However, he remains concerned
about his weight. He reports that his appetite is better
and he is eating well but has not regained any weight.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
Mr. A’s response to your intervention is rewarding. It is surprising
that his weight is not improving particularly in light of his
improved appetite. During his previous visit, he mentioned diffi-
cult to flush, large stools and you wonder if part of his weight loss
is secondary to malabsorption. You revisit the common causes of
malabsorption and diarrhea (Table 27–9 and Figure 27–5). 
Table 27–9. Differential diagnosis of diarrhea organized by mechanism.
Most common causes: IBS, lactose intolerance, chronic infections, IBD, celiac disease
Osmotic diarrhea:
Secretory diarrhea:
• Diagnostic clue: increased osmolar gap
• Diagnostic clue: no osmolar gap
• Lactose intolerance
• Laxative abuse (nonosmotic laxative)
• Mg++ laxatives, antacids
• Bacterial toxin
Fatty diarrhea:
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Diagnostic clue: Stool fecal fat 
• Collagenous colitis
• Celiac disease
• Ileal bile salt malabsorption
• Crohn disease
• Microscopic colitis
• Short bowel syndrome
• Motility disorders: diabetic neuropathy, hyperthyroidism, IBS
• Bacterial overgrowth
• Neuroendocrine: Mastocytosis, carcinoid syndrome,VIPoma
• Pancreatic insufficiency
• Neoplasia: Colon cancer, lymphoma, villous adenoma
Inflammatory diarrhea:
• Diagnostic clue: Fecal calprotectin, fecal lactoferrin
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Infectious 
• Ischemic colitis
• Radiation colitis
• Neoplasia
Infections include invasive bacteria, C difficile, TB, HSV, CMV, amebiasis, giardiasis
Osmolar gap ≡Measured fecal osmolarity – calculated fecal osmolarity Nl < 50 osm/L. Calculated fecal osmolarity = 2 x (fecal Na+ + fecal K+)
IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  459
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
3
Mr. A denies ever being diagnosed with acute pancreati-
tis. He does remember multiple episodes of abdominal
pain over the years following a night of binging. He did not
seek medical care but remained at home drinking only
clear fluids for several days until the pain subsided. He
denies any history of bowel surgery, family history of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), hematochezia, recent
antibiotic use, or travel. 
Mr. A’s history of alcohol abuse and recurrent pain leads you to
suspect that he may have chronic pancreatitis. This becomes the
leading hypothesis. 
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need? 
Leading Hypothesis: Chronic Pancreatitis
Textbook Presentation 
Patients typically seek medical attention for long-standing post-
prandial abdominal pain. Frequent, loose, malodorous bowel
movements are common, and weight loss occurs. Patients may note
that several flushes are required to clear the toilet. A prior history
of alcoholism and acute pancreatitis are clues to the diagnosis.
Disease Highlights 
A. Usually secondary to recurrent acute pancreatitis, primarily
from alcohol abuse (70% of adult cases). Less common causes
in adults include cystic fibrosis, hereditary pancreatitis, ductal
obstruction (ie, stones, tumor), autoimmune disease, hyper-
calcemia, and hypertriglyceridemia. 
B. Progressive destruction results in both exocrine and endocrine
insufficiency. 
C. Manifestations include
1. Chronic, disabling, mid-epigastric postprandial pain is very
common (80–100% of patients) and a major cause of mor-
bidity. The pain may radiate to the back and be relieved by
sitting forward.
2. Weight loss secondary to anorexia and steatorrhea
3. Steatorrhea 
a. Defined as fat malabsorption ≥14 g/d (nl ≤7 g/d fecal
fat on 75–100 g fat diet. Patients with primarily watery
diarrhea may excrete up to 13 g/d of fecal fat.)
b. Manifestations include difficult to flush oily stools and
weight loss. Elderly patients may not have diarrhea.
c. Floating stools not specific for steatorrhea (bacterial gas
may also result in floating stools)
d. Diarrhea may develop secondary to bacterial over-
growth, which develops in 40% of patients with chronic
pancreatitis.
4. Diabetes develops in over 40% of patients due to the con-
comitant destruction of islet cells. 
a. Ketoacidosis is rare. 
b. Hypoglycemia is common due to loss of glucagon-
producing pancreatic alpha cells. 
5. Complications include pseudocysts, obstruction of the
common bile duct or duodenum and pancreatic ascites.
Splenic vein thrombosis may also develop, leading to gastric
varices.
6. Pancreatic cancer develops in 4% of patients. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. One study reported IWL and diarrhea in 68%, and bloating
in 30%. Diabetes was found in 28%. 
B. Amylase and lipase are often normal or slightly elevated.
C. Abdominal radiographs may reveal pancreatic calcifications.
Sensitivity is only 30%. 
D. Routine abdominal ultrasound is 60–70% sensitive and
80–90% specific.
E. CT scan is test of choice. It may demonstrate ductal calcifica-
tion (74–90% sensitive, 85% specific) and can demonstrate
pancreatic pseudocysts or tumor.
F. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is
invasive and typically reserved for patients in whom it might
be therapeutic (ie, stenting) (sensitivity, 75–95%; specificity
≈90%). 
G. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is 97% sensitive and 60%
specific. 
H. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) is
being evaluated for the diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis. 
I. ERCP, EUS, and MRCP are less sensitive in patients with
mild disease (55–72%).
J. Secretin stimulation test can document pancreatic exocrine
insufficiency. This test is highly accurate but invasive and rarely
performed. 
K. Tests for steatorrhea
1. Stool Sudan III stain (qualitative) is 90% sensitive for fecal
fat ≥10 g/d.
2. Acid steatocrit (performed on spot stool specimen) is
100% sensitive and 95% specific. 
3. Can also be confirmed by low levels of fecal fat elastase
(sensitivity and specificity 93%).
Treatment
A. Abstinence from drinking is vital (but not universally effective
at halting progression).
B. Pain management
1. Exclude other causes of increasing or persistent pain 
2. NSAIDS, TCAs, and opioids are often used. Opioid
dependence is a common problem.
3. Pancreatic enzymes can decrease pain and improve nutri-
tional status. 
a. Give with meals and low fat diets (< 20 g/d). 
460 /  CHAPTER 27
History
Dietary history: Association with milk products, sorbitol-containing mints or gums, caffeine, ruffage
Medication history: Including over-the-counter medications, antacids, recent antibiotics, metformin
Social history: Recent travel, alcohol use, risk factors for HIV
Family history: Jewish descent, family history of IBD or celiac disease
Clinical clues: Weight loss, stool appearance (bloody, oily), history of pancreatitis, alcohol use,
 
manifestations of IBD (hematochezia, erythema nodosum, uveitis, aphthous ulcers, rectal abscess, fever);
Past medical history: Prior small bowel or gastric resection, cholecystectomy, radiation
Physical exam: Include comprehensive exam, weight, thyroid and abdominal exam, FOBT. Pallor, edema,
 easy bruisability
Laboratory studies: CBC with differential, stool cultures, O & P (or stool Giardia antigen), stool C difficile toxin,
 TSH, LFTs, BMP, serum albumin, cholesterol, HIV if appropriate
No clues
Clues
Lactose intolerance
C difficile colitis
Amebiasis, giardiasis
IBD
Bacterial overgrowth
IBS
Laxative abuse
Pancreatic insufficiency
IBD, celiac disease
Side effect
Associated milk products
Recent antibiotics,
hospitalization, or
nursing home
Hematochezia, positive FOBT,
iron deficiency anemia
Erythema nodosum, uveitis,
family history of IBD, fevers,
aphthous ulcers, rectal abscess
AIDS-related infection
Injection drug use, high-risk
sexual behavior
Surgical small bowel resection,
history of pancreatitis
Lifelong history of intermittent
diarrhea, constipation, pain
relieved by defecation
Alcohol abuse, pancreatitis,
difficult to flush/oily stools
History of eating disorder,
melanosis coli on
fiberoptic sigmoidoscopy,
secondary gain from illness
Incriminating medication
Recent travel
Test, treat and
follow-up
Options include:
• Colonoscopy with biopsy
• Stool evaluation to categorize
 mechanism (see Table 27–9)
• Serum IgA tGT, IgA EMA, ASCA,
 pANCA
• Lactose breath test
• Capsule endoscopy
• GI referral
Resolved?
Yes
No
BMP, basic metabolic panel; FOBT, fecal occult blood test; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease;
IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; LFTs, liver function tests; O & P, ova and parasite.
Figure 27–5. Diagnostic approach: malabsorption and diarrhea.
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  461
b. Nonenteric coated enzymes may provide superior pain
relief. 
c. Coadministration of PPIs is recommended to prevent
the inactivation of the enzymes. 
C. Diabetes should be treated, with care to avoid hypoglycemia.
Metformin should be avoided due to concomitant alcoholism.
D. ERCP, stenting, and surgery are useful in selected patients to
relieve obstruction and pain.
E. Pseudocysts require surgical or endoscopic drainage.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
3
A CT scan of the abdomen reveals multiple areas of pan-
creatic calcifications consistent with chronic pancreati-
tis. A Sudan stain for fecal fat is positive consistent
with fat malabsorption. 
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, chronic pancreatitis?
Have you ruled out the active alternatives?
Do other tests need to be done to exclude
the alternative diagnoses? 
Alternative Diagnosis: Bacterial Overgrowth
Textbook Presentation
Classically, patients have previously undergone GI surgery that
resulted in some type of surgical blind loop that allows for bacte-
rial multiplication. Patients may experience long-standing diar-
rhea, bloating, and weight loss.
Disease Highlights
A. Mechanism of diarrhea is multifactorial. 
1. Bacteria digest carbohydrates producing gas and osmoti-
cally active byproducts promoting an osmotic diarrhea
2. Bacteria and their fatty acid byproducts injure mucosa and
contribute to diarrhea. 
3. Mucosal injury can create lactase deficiency. 
4. Bacterial deconjugation of bile salts interferes with fat
absorption and the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.
B. Etiologies
1. Stasis
a. Strictures (surgical, Crohn disease, radiation enteritis)
b. Anatomic abnormalities (surgical blind loops or diver-
ticula)
c. Dysmotility (diabetic autonomic neuropathy, scleroderma)
d. Chronic pancreatitis (obstruction or opioid therapy
can promote stasis).
2. Abnormal small to large intestine connections (ie, fistula
or resection of ileocecal valve (allows retrograde coloniza-
tion from heavily colonized colon into ileum)
3. Achlorhydria (ie, PPI therapy or autoimmune)
4. Miscellaneous (cirrhosis up to 60% of patients, end-stage
renal disease) 
C. Bacteria may utilize B12, leading to B12 deficiency. 
D. Unusual complications include tetany (due to hypocalcemia)
and night blindness due to vitamin A deficiency.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Healthy older patients may also have bacterial overgrowth
without any symptoms, making diagnosis difficult. 
B. Gold standard is quantitative jejunal aspirates demonstrating
> 105 bacteria. 
C. A variety of tests detect bacterial byproducts in exhaled breath
as an aid to diagnosis. Since bacteria normally reside in the
colon, but only in low levels in the small intestine, early peaks
in the concentration of these byproducts suggests small intes-
tinal bacterial overgrowth. False-positives and false-negatives
occur when other conditions increase or decrease bowel tran-
sit time, respectively.
1. D xylose breath test is usually abnormal secondary to bac-
terial digestion of xylose-releasing radiolabeled C14.
a. Sensitivity 30–95%, specificity 89–100%. 
b. Avoid in fertile women. 
c. Antibiotics can interfere with the breath tests. 
2. Hydrogen breath tests measure bacterial hydrogen pro-
duction (measured in the patients breath) after patients
ingest sugar. 
a. Their accuracy is similar to the xylose tests and avoids
radioactivity. 
b. Some bacteria produce methane, and this measure-
ment may increase accuracy.
D. Consider bacterial overgrowth if upper GI series demonstrates
hypomotility, obstruction, or diverticula.
E. Weight loss may occur without diarrhea.
F. Therapeutic trials of antibiotics may be necessary. 
Treatment
A. Eliminate drugs that reduce intestinal motility or reduce gas-
tric acidity.
B. A variety of oral antibiotics have been used for 7–10 days.
Rotating course of antibiotics has been used in some patients.
Rifaximin is a nonabsorbable antibiotic that has been useful.
C. Correct calcium, vitamin A, D, K and B12 deficiency.
D. Minimizing carbohydrates, especially lactose, can be helpful.
Alternative Diagnosis: IBD 
IBD (Crohn disease and ulcerative colitis) are complex diseases.
Genetic factors and commensal bacterial factors play a role. They
are found most commonly in patients of Jewish descent and among
patients with a family history of IBD. Crohn disease is a transmural
process that may affect the entire GI tract whereas ulcerative colitis
is a mucosal disease limited to the colon. Manifestations may be
intestinal or extraintestinal (uveitis, erythema nodosum, large joint
peripheral arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, sclerosing cholangitis,
secondary amyloidosis, and venous thromboembolism). Chronic
colitis increases the risk of colon cancer in proportional to the
amount of the colon involved and the duration of disease.
462 /  CHAPTER 27
1. Crohn Disease
Textbook Presentation 
Common complaints include chronic abdominal pain, diarrhea,
fever, weight loss, enterocutaneous fistulas, and acute abdominal
pain, (which can mimic acute appendicitis). 
Disease Highlights
A. Transmural inflammation leads to fistula formation, stric-
tures, and obstruction. Complications of fistulas include
abscess formation, peritonitis, enterocutaneous fistulas (most
commonly perianal), and enterovesicular fistulas (resulting in
polymicrobial urinary tract infection).
B. Manifestations
1. Can involve any part of GI tract with normal “skip areas”
between involved areas
a. 80% of patients have small bowel involvement (most
often in terminal ileum)
b. 50% of patients have ileocolitis
c. 20% of patients have isolated colitis
2. Nonspecific symptoms may precede diagnosis by many years.
3. Diarrhea may occur due to
a. Small bowel disease impairing absorption
b. Ileal disease, may decrease ileal bile absorption allowing
bile salts into the colon which, in turn, causes irritation
and diarrhea. Alternatively, when bile salt malabsorption
is severe, it leads to bile salt deficiency and steatorrhea.
c. Bacterial overgrowth secondary to strictures 
4. Abdominal pain, weight loss, and fever 
5. B12 deficiency (secondary to ileal disease)
6. Calcium oxalate renal stones 
a. Normal oxalate absorption is limited by intraluminal
intestinal binding of oxalate to calcium. 
b. Intraluminal fat is increased in malabsorption and
binds intraluminal calcium decreasing calcium’s avail-
ability to oxalate.
c. This leads to increased oxalate absorption. 
d. Increased oxalate absorption causes hyperoxaluria and
predisposes patients to kidney stones.
7. Osteoporosis due to vitamin D deficiency, calcium malab-
sorption, and corticosteroid therapy. 
8. Gross bleeding is less frequent than in ulcerative colitis
9. Aphthous ulcers
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Colonoscopy with ileoscopy is often useful with biopsy.
B. Noninvasive markers 
1. Serum markers (ASCA and pANCA) and stool mark-
ers (calprotectin and lactoferrin) can suggest IBD
(Table 27–10).
2. Negative ASCA and pANCA do not rule out IBD.
3. Other inflammatory intestinal diseases can result in posi-
tive ASCA studies and fecal markers. ASCA is positive in
38% of patients with celiac disease and 67% of patients
with intestinal tuberculosis.
4. C-reactive protein is insensitive for IBD (64%).
C. Diagnostic imaging
1. A variety of imaging techniques are available to image the
small bowel when colonoscopy/ileoscopy fails to establish
the diagnosis, including 
a. Small bowel follow through 
b. Enteroclysis 
c. CT enterography (CTE) 
d. MR enterography (MRE) 
e. Small bowel ultrasound
f. Capsule endoscopy (CE)
2. Recent reviews and meta-analysis suggest CE has a greater
diagnostic yield than 
a. Small bowel barium studies (43% vs 13%)
b. Colonoscopy/ileoscopy (33% vs 26%) 
c. CTE (70% vs 21%)
d. MRE (72% vs 50%) 
3. CE was also superior to push enteroscopy. 
4. There are two major limitations to capsule enteroscopy.
a. First, CE is not completely specific. Small mucosal
breaks can be caused by NSAIDs and be seen in nor-
mal patients. 
b. Second, the capsule can get stuck in strictures necessi-
tating surgical removal. The risk of this in patients
undergoing CE for the diagnosis of Crohn disease is ≈3%
and may be minimized by avoiding CE in patients
with known or suspected strictures. 
5. A new capsule that disintegrates within the GI tract may
markedly decrease this risk (Patency capsule). Some
authorities recommend a small bowel study prior to CE to
rule out a stricture. 
Table 27–10. Test characteristics of markers for the diagnosis of IBD.
Test
Comments
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
LR+
LR−
Either ASCA or pANCA +
Suggests IBD
62.6
92.6
8.5
0.4
ASCA+/pANCA−
Suggests Crohn disease
54.6
92.8
7.6
0.49
ASCA−/pANCA+
Suggests ulcerative colitis
51.3
94.3
9
0.5
Stool calprotectin
Suggests IBD
90
80
4.5
0.13
Stool lactoferrin
Suggests IBD
87
96
21.8
0.14
IBD, inflammatory bowel disease.
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  463
6. One approach to imaging in Crohn disease is presented in
Figure 27–6.
D. Active infection with the following organisms should be
excluded in patients presenting with diarrhea: Salmonella,
Shigella, Campylobacter, Yersinia, Escherichia coli 0157:H7,
Yersinia, Giardia, C difficile, and E histolytica. 
Treatment
A. Primary therapy often uses 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA),
often with antibiotics.
B. Options for nonresponders or patients with severe disease
include corticosteroids, 6 mercaptopurine (6MP), methotrex-
ate, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) antagonists. 
C. Adjunctive therapy
1. Treat lactose intolerance if present
2. Antibiotics, CT-guided drainage of abscesses
3. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) and multivitamins
a. Necessary if patient is unable to maintain adequate
nutrition. 
b. May also produce remission in refractory cases.
4. Bile acid resins for patients with watery diarrhea and ileal
disease
5. Monitor for colon cancer if colonic involvement.
6. Surgery
a. May be required for the management of massive
hemorrhage, fulminant colitis, abscesses, peritoni-
tis, obstruction, or disease refractory to medical
therapy. 
b. High rate of recurrence following surgery (10–15%/y
clinical recurrence, 80% endoscopic recurrence). 
c. 5-ASA, metronidazole, and 6MP have been demon-
strated to reduce postoperative recurrences. 
2. Ulcerative Colitis
Textbook Presentation 
Typically, bloody diarrhea and fecal urgency are the presenting
symptoms. 
Disease Highlights
A. Primarily mucosal disease. (Occasionally, severe inflammation
may extend deeper, involving muscular layers resulting in
dysmotility and toxic megacolon.)
B. Strictly limited to colon
C. Starts at rectum and proceeds proximally in a continuous
fashion; may be limited to rectum or involve rectosigmoid or
entire colon. Rectal sparing suggests another disease (ie,
Crohn disease).
D. Decreased risk among smokers (opposite of Crohn disease)
E. Anemia, fever, and increasing diarrhea are seen with more
extensive disease.
F. Complications 
1. Massive hemorrhage (rare)
2. Toxic megacolon 
3. Stricture
4. Colon cancer 
a. The cancer risk is increased except in patients with just
proctitis or very distal colitis. 
b. Increased risk begins 7–8 years after onset of disease. 
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy demonstrates loss of vascular
markings, erythema, friability, and exudates in a continuous
fashion extending from the rectum proximally. 
B. Biopsy specimen reveals crypt abscesses, branching crypts,
and glandular atrophy.
C. Serologic and stool studies can suggest IBD (see Crohn dis-
ease) but are less helpful in ulcerative colitis since colonoscopy
can rule in or rule out ulcerative colitis.
D. Exclude acute infectious processes (Salmonella, Shigella,
Campylobacter, E coli 0157:H7, C difficile, E histolytica). 
E. NSAIDs may cause colitis and their use should also be excluded.
Treatment
A. For distal disease, options include oral 5–ASA preparations or
topical preparations of 5-ASA or corticosteroids (supposito-
ries, enemas, or foams). 
1. Enemas can be used for disease that extends to 30–40 cm
from the rectum. 
2. Oral preparations are necessary for more proximal disease.
B. Oral or systemic corticosteroids can be added for more severe
disease or nonresponders. 
C. 5-ASA preparations (but not topical corticosteroids) are effec-
tive at maintaining remission.
D. Cyclosporine, 6MP, and infliximab have been effective in
some patients with severe, corticosteroid refractory disease. 
E. Antibiotics may be useful in select ill patients, particularly
those with toxic megacolon or peritonitis.
Suspected Crohn disease
Obstructive symptoms?
Other modalities (SBFT or
patency capsule or CTE)
Capsule endoscopy
Stop
Positive
Negative
Yes
No
Colonoscopy/ileoscopy
CTE, CT enterography; SBFT, small bowel follow through.
Figure 27–6. Imaging approach: Crohn disease. (Reproduced,
with permission, from Kornbluth A, Colombel JF, Leighton JA,
Loftus E; ICCE. ICCE consensus for inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. Endoscopy. 2005;37(10):1051–4.)
464 /  CHAPTER 27
F. Surgery (colectomy) is curative. Indications include:
1. Patients with high-grade dysplasia, carcinoma in situ or
cancer on surveillance colonoscopy. Low-grade dysplasia
should also prompt consideration for colectomy. 
2. Other severe complications including massive hemor-
rhage, perforation, and toxic megacolon.
3. Intractable disease
G. Adjuvant therapy
1. Persistent diarrhea
a. Test for lactose intolerance 
b. Avoid fresh fruits, vegetables, and caffeine 
2. Surveillance colonoscopy for colon cancer for ulcerative
colitis and Crohn disease begins 8 years after diagnosis and
then every 1–2 years. 
3. Supplemental iron
4. Fish oils and nicotine (transdermal) have been demon-
strated to induce remission in some patients. 
5. TPN if patients are unable to maintain adequate nutrition
6. Antidiarrheals may increase the increased risk of toxic
megacolon.
7. Screen patients who have been taking corticosteroids for >
3 months for osteoporosis. 
CASE RESOLUTION
Mr. A’s history and CT scan point strongly toward chronic pancre-
atitis. It would be reasonable to exclude chronic infection (C difficile,
Giardia, and E histolytica) with a single stool for ova and parasites and
stool for C difficile toxin. IBD is possible but unlikely. Since bacter-
ial overgrowth can complicate chronic pancreatitis, an empiric trial
of antibiotics could be given if therapy for chronic pancreatitis is
unsuccessful.
3
Mr. A is given pancreatic enzymes. He reports that his
diarrhea and bloating are greatly improved. Six months
later he is back to his baseline weight. 
REVIEW OF OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
Celiac Disease
Textbook Presentation 
Classically, chronic diarrhea, steatorrhea, and weight loss are pres-
ent. Iron and vitamin deficiencies may be seen.
Disease Highlights
A. Prevalence ≈1% in Northern Europeans; affects women
2–3 times more often than men. 
B. Secondary to immune reaction to gliadin, a component of the
wheat protein gluten. Antibodies develop to gliadin, transglu-
taminase (tTG), and endomysin (EMA). 
C. Celiac disease is only seen in patients who carry either the
HLA DQ2 or HLA DQ8 alleles. 
D. Immune reaction results in villous atrophy and malabsorption.
E. Clinical manifestations
1. Usually presents between ages 10 and 40 years, although
may be recognized in patients aged 60–80 years
2. Symptoms precipitated by exposure to wheat protein (gluten)
and resolve within weeks to months on gluten-free diet.
3. Diarrhea and weight loss are seen in 68% of patients.
Patients may also have unexplained iron deficiency ane-
mia, osteoporosis, or abnormal liver function tests; how-
ever, they could be asymptomatic. 
4. Vitamin deficiencies may cause ataxia and headaches. 
5. Osteopenia and osteoporosis may develop due to vitamin D
deficiency and subsequent secondary hyperparathyroidism.
6. Strongly associated with dermatitis herpetiformis, which
develops secondary to antibodies against epidermal trans-
glutaminase. 
7. Far more common in patients with Down syndrome
8. Increase risk of other autoimmune disorders including
thyroiditis and type 1 diabetes mellitus
9. Patients with celiac disease are at increased risk for intes-
tinal adenocarcinoma and enteropathy-associated T cell
lymphoma.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Diagnostic options include duodenal biopsy (the gold stan-
dard), serology, and clinical response to gluten-free diet. 
B. Small bowel biopsy is the gold standard and useful but inva-
sive. Strategies can help determine when biopsies are neces-
sary (see below). 
C. Serologic testing is highly accurate but not perfect. 
1. Endomysial antibody (IgA EMA) 
a. 81–97% sensitive, 99% specific 
b. LR+ ≈100, LR−0.03–0.19
2. Tissue glutaminase antibody (IgA tGT) 
a. 81–95% sensitive, 91–99% specific 
b. LR+ 10.1–90, LR+ 0.05–0.19
3. There are several causes of false-negative serologies including
a. IgA deficiency: IgG tGT antibodies can be tested
when the suspicion is high and IgA levels are low or
absent.
b. Gluten-free diets: IgA levels fall (and may become neg-
ative) in patients on gluten-free diet. (Increasing titers
in celiac patients suggest dietary noncompliance.)
c. One paper suggested EMA was less sensitive (50–60%)
in patients over age 35 years who smoke. 
D. HLA typing
1. Virtually all patients with celiac disease express HLA-
DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 heterodimers. 
a. 100% sensitive but only 57–75% specific
b. LR+ 2.3, LR−0
2. Celiac disease can be virtually ruled out in patients who
are negative for HLA-DQ2 or HAL-DQ8.
3. May be useful in patients in patients who instituted a
gluten-free diet before evaluation in whom IgA-tGT and
IgA EMA antibody levels may be low due to decreased dis-
ease activity. If the patient expressed neither HLA DQ
haplotype, celiac disease could be excluded. 
INVOLUNTARY WEIGHT LOSS /  465
E. Surprisingly, due to the low prevalence of celiac disease, posi-
tive EMA and tGT serologies do not confirm the diagnosis,
despite the high specificity. 
1. The PPV ranges from 29% to 76% and biopsy is neces-
sary to confirm the diagnosis. 
2. On the other hand, negative EMA and tGT serologies
make the diagnosis very unlikely (NPV ≈99%) and essen-
tially rule out the disease. 
3. If concern remains despite a negative result, HLA typing
could help completely exclude the disease. 
4. One approach is shown in Figure 27–7.
Treatment 
A. Gluten-free diet (no wheat, rye, and barley) 
B. Oats that are uncontaminated with gluten are usually toler-
ated in patients with celiac disease. 
C. Lactose avoidance may be necessary due to concomitant lac-
tase deficiency.
D. Correct iron, folic acid, vitamin B12, and vitamin D deficiencies.
E. Pneumococcal vaccine is recommended by some experts. 
F. Corticosteroids or other immunosuppressives have rarely been
necessary in patients with refractory celiac sprue.
G. Osteoporosis screening is recommended.
REFERENCES
Bergstrom JP, Helander A. Clinical characteristics of carbohydrate-deficient trans-
ferrin (% disialotransferrin) measured by HPLC: sensitivity, specificity, gen-
der effects, and relationship with other alcohol biomarkers. Alcohol Alcohol.
2008;43(4):436–41.
Bhatt DL, Scheiman J, Abraham NS. ACCF/ACG/AHA 2008 Expert Consensus
Document on Reducing the Gastrointestinal Risks of Antiplatelet Therapy
and NSAID Use. Circulation. 2008;118.
Bilbao-Garay J, Barba R, Losa-Garcia JE et al. Assessing clinical probability of
organic disease in patients with involuntary weight loss: a simple score. Eur
J Intern Med. 2002;13:240–5.
Bradley KA, Boyd-Wickizer J, Powell SH, Burman ML. Alcohol screening ques-
tionnaires in women: a critical review. JAMA. 1998;280(2):166–71.
Brent GA. Clinical practice. Graves’ disease. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(24):2594–605.
Callery MP, Freedman SD. A 21-year-old man with chronic pancreatitis. JAMA.
2008;299(13):1588–94.
Gisbert JP, Abraira V. Accuracy of Helicobacter pylori diagnostic tests in patients
with bleeding peptic ulcer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Gas-
troenterol. 2006;101(4):848–63.
Gisbert JP, de la Morena F, Abraira V. Accuracy of monoclonal stool antigen test
for the diagnosis of H. pylori infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101(8):1921–30.
Hadithi M, von Blomberg BM, Crusius JB et al. Accuracy of serologic tests and
HLA-DQ typing for diagnosing celiac disease. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147(5):
294–302.
Hernandez JL, Riancho JA, Matorras P, Gonzalez-Macias J. Clinical evaluation for
cancer in patients with involuntary weight loss without specific symptoms.
Am J Med. 2003;114(8):631–7.
Diarrhea, weight loss,
abdominal pain,
unexplained iron
deficiency anemia
Consider celiac disease
IgA tGT,
IgA EMA
HLA DQ2
or DQ8
Biopsy
Positive
Celiac
disease
Celiac
disease
ruled out
Negative
Negative
No
Yes
Positive
Positive
Suspicion high,
IgA deficiency or
patient on gluten-
free diet
Figure 27–7. Diagnostic approach: celiac disease.
466 /  CHAPTER 27
Hopper AD, Cross SS, Hurlstone DP et al. Pre-endoscopy serological testing for coeliac
disease: evaluation of a clinical decision tool. BMJ. 2007;334(7596):729.
Metalidis C, Knockaert DC, Bobbaers H, Vanderschueren S. Involuntary weight
loss. Does a negative baseline evaluation provide adequate reassurance? Eur J
Intern Med. 2008;19(5):345–9.
Nakao H, Konishi H, Mitsufuji S et al. Comparison of clinical features and patient
background in functional dyspepsia and peptic ulcer. Dig Dis Sci.
2007;52(9):2152–8.
Pignone MP, Gaynes BN, Rushton JL et al. Screening for depression in adults: a
summary of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann
Intern Med. 2002;136(10):765–76.
Reese GE, Constantinides VA, Simillis C et al. Diagnostic precision of anti-
Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies and perinuclear antineutrophil cyto-
plasmic antibodies in inflammatory bowel disease. Am J Gastroenterol.
2006; 101(10):2410–22.
Saitz R. Clinical practice. Unhealthy alcohol use. N Engl J Med. 2005;352(6):
596–607.
Schoepfer AM, Trummler M, Seeholzer P, Seibold-Schmid B, Seibold F. Discrim-
inating IBD from IBS: comparison of the test performance of fecal markers,
blood leukocytes, CRP, and IBD antibodies. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2008;
14(1):32–9.
Talley NJ, American Gastroenterological A. American Gastroenterological Associ-
ation medical position statement: evaluation of dyspepsia. Gastroenterology.
2005;129(5):1753–5.
Triester SL, Leighton JA, Leontiadis GI et al. A meta-analysis of the yield of capsule
endoscopy compared to other diagnostic modalities in patients with non-
stricturing small bowel Crohn’s disease. Am J Gastroenterol. 2006;101(5):
954–64.
US Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and behavioral counseling interven-
tions in primary care to reduce alcohol misuse: recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2004;140(7):554–6.
?
28
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 
1
Mr. C is a 32-year-old man with occasional wheezing.
What is the differential diagnosis of wheez-
ing? How would you frame the differential?
CONSTRUCTING A DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Wheezing and stridor are symptoms of airflow obstruction. These
sounds are caused by the vibration of the walls of pathologically
narrow airways. Wheezing is a musical sound produced primarily
during expiration by airways of any size. Stridor is a single pitch,
inspiratory sound that is produced by large airways with severe
narrowing.
Stridor is often a sign of impending airway obstruc-
tion and should be considered an emergency.
The differential diagnosis for airway obstruction is large. It is best
remembered by an anatomic approach. Stridor may be caused by
severe obstruction of any proximal airway (see A through D in the
differential diagnosis outline below). A more clinical approach to the
differential appears in the algorithm at the end of the chapter.
A. Nasopharynx and oropharynx
1. Tonsillar hypertrophy
2. Pharyngitis
3. Peritonsillar abscess
4. Retropharyngeal abscess
B. Laryngopharynx and larynx
1. Epiglottitis
2. Paradoxical vocal cord movement (PVCM)
3. Anaphylaxis and laryngeal edema
4. Postnasal drip
5. Benign and malignant tumors of the larynx and upper airway
6. Vocal cord paralysis
C. Trachea
1. Tracheal stenosis
2. Tracheomalacia
3. Goiter
D. Proximal airways
1. Foreign-body aspiration
2. Bronchitis
E. Distal airways
1. Asthma
2. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
3. Pulmonary edema
4. Pulmonary embolism
5. Bronchiectasis
6. Bronchiolitis
1
Mr. C has been having symptoms for 1–2 years. His symp-
toms have always been so mild that he has never sought
care. Over the last month, he has been more sympto-
matic with wheezing, chest tightness, and shortness of
breath. His symptoms are worse with exercise and worse
at night. He notes that he often goes days without
symptoms.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The presence of wheezing, chest tightness, and shortness of breath
are pivotal clues that place asthma at the top of the differential
diagnosis. Although asthma is by far the most likely diagnosis,
other diseases that could account for recurrent symptoms of air-
way obstruction should be considered. Allergic rhinitis can cause
cough and wheezing but it would be very unusual for it to cause
shortness of breath. Vocal cord dysfunction, such as PVCM, is fre-
quently confused with asthma. COPD can also cause intermittent
pulmonary symptoms. Table 28–1 lists the differential diagnosis.
1
On further history, Mr. C reports that he had asthma as
a child and was treated for years with theophylline. He
was without symptoms until he moved 2 years ago.
I have a patient with wheezing or stridor.
How do I determine the cause?
467
468 /  CHAPTER 28
He reports that his symptoms are worst when he has
a cold, when he jogs, and when he is around dogs or cats.
His most common symptoms are chest tightness and
dyspnea. Only when his symptoms are at their worst
does he hear wheezing. He has never smoked cigarettes.
On physical exam he appears well. His vital signs are
BP, 120/76 mm Hg; RR, 14 breaths per minute; pulse,
72 bpm; temperature, 36.9°C. His lung exam is normal
without wheezes or prolonged expiratory phase. His peak
flow is 550 L/min (87% of predicted).
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: Asthma
Textbook Presentation
Asthma commonly presents as recurrent episodes of dyspnea,
often with chest tightness, cough, and wheezing. Patients usu-
ally report stereotypical triggers (eg, allergens, cold weather,
exercise) and rapid response to β-agonist inhalers. Asthma is so
common that most patients have diagnosed themselves prior to
presentation.
Disease Highlights
A. Definition: The NIH/NHLBI definition of asthma is “A
chronic inflammatory disease of the airways in which many
cells and cellular elements play a role.” “In susceptible individ-
uals, this inflammation causes recurrent episodes of wheezing,
breathlessness, chest tightness, and cough, particularly at night
and/or in the early morning. These episodes are usually associ-
ated with widespread but variable airflow limitation that is
often reversible either spontaneously or with treatment.”
B. Clinical manifestations
1. Asthma is recurrent and intermittent. Patients will have
periods with no or only mild symptoms unless severe dis-
ease develops when patients have persistent symptoms.
2. Asthma usually presents during childhood but presenta-
tion as an adult is not uncommon.
3. People with asthma have fluctuation of airway function.
a. Airway function is most commonly measured by peak
expiratory flow (PEF).
b. Values are generally lowest in the morning and highest
at mid-day.
c. PEF will vary by more than 20% in asthmatic patients
over the course of the day.
4. Identifying exacerbating factors and timing of symptoms
is important. It aids in the diagnosis of asthma (exacerbat-
ing factors are stereotypical) and in treatment (if the fac-
tors are reversible).
a. Asthma frequently worsens at night (probably related
to decreased mucociliary clearance, airway cooling, and
low levels of endogenous catecholamines).
b. Asthma frequently worsens with exercise (probably
related to airway cooling and drying).
c. Viral infections are a common cause of asthma exacer-
bations.
d. Occupational agents may cause or exacerbate asthma
by a number of mechanisms:
(1) Corrosive agents (ammonia)
(2) Pharmacologic agents (organophosphates)
(3) Reflex bronchoconstriction (ozone)
(4) IgE-mediated (latex)
Asthma should be in the differential diagnosis of any
patient with intermittent respiratory symptoms.
C. Classification: The present classification scheme for asthma
helps focus attention on the severity of the asthma and dove-
tails nicely with treatment considerations (Table 28–2). It
should be noted, however, that by necessity this scheme sim-
plifies asthma phenotypes and many patients do not fit well
into a single category.
D. Exacerbations or “flares”
1. Asthma exacerbations are periods of increased disease activ-
ity identified by increased airflow obstruction (and there-
fore increased symptoms) and increased medication use.
2. Exacerbations may or may not be caused by an identifiable
trigger.
3. Management of an exacerbation depends on an accurate
assessment of the cause of the exacerbation and the risk to
the patient.
EVIDENCE-BASED DIAGNOSIS
A. There is no 1 specific test to diagnose asthma; the diagnosis is
a clinical one, based on multiple findings in the history, phys-
ical, and a few simple tests.
B. Asthma is easily recognized when it presents with intermittent
wheezing; in fact the diagnosis is often made by the patient.
Table 28–1. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. C.
Diagnostic 
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Asthma
Episodic and reversible
Peak flow
airflow obstruction
PFTs 
Methacholine challenge 
Response to treatment
Active Alternative
Allergic
Rhinitis with 
Response to treatment
rhinitis
seasonal variation
Vocal cord
Voice pathology 
Abnormal vocal cord
dysfunction
accompanies airflow
movement visualized
obstruction
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
COPD
Presence of smoking
PFTs 
history
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  469
C. Diagnosing asthma is challenging when it presents in atypical
ways. Asthma should be high in the differential diagnosis when
a patient has any of the following intermittent symptoms:
1. Wheezing
2. Dyspnea
3. Cough
4. Chest tightness
D. The key points in establishing the diagnosis of asthma are:
1. Episodic symptoms of airflow obstruction
2. Reversibility of the airflow obstruction
3. Exclusion of other likely diseases
E. There are not great data on the test characteristics of various
symptoms of asthma.
1. One large study interviewed nearly 10,000 healthy, com-
munity dwelling people regarding pulmonary symptoms
in the preceding 12 months.
a. 225 of these people had asthma, defined as reporting
that they had asthma and that a medical professional
had confirmed the diagnosis.
b. The test characteristics of the most predictive historical
features are shown in Table 28–3.
c. It is important to note that these test characteristics
were derived in a healthy population. Specificities
would be lower in a population containing patients
with other cardiopulmonary diseases. 
2. In another study, which used a methacholine challenge
test to diagnose asthma, 90% specificity was achieved for
making the diagnosis of asthma with the question, “Do
you cough during or after exercise?”
F. Other clues that make the diagnosis more likely are outlined
in the NIH/NHLBI guidelines:
1. Diurnal variability in PEF (> 20% variability between best
and worst)
2. Symptoms occur or worsen in the presence of:
a. Exercise
b. Viral infections
c. Animals with fur or feathers
d. House dust mites
e. Mold
f. Smoke
g. Pollen
h. Weather changes
i. Laughing or hard crying
j. Airborne chemicals or dust
3. Symptoms occur or worsen at night.
G. There is some evidence that persons with asthma describe
their dyspnea differently from people with other cardiorespi-
ratory disease. They are more likely to refer to symptoms of
chest tightness or constriction.
H. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)
1. PFTs are recommended for patients with suspected
asthma both as a diagnostic test and to provide objective
data to be used in the assessment of management.
Table 28–2. Classification of asthma severity.
Classification
Symptoms
Lung Function
Mild
Symptoms less than 
PEF > 80% of 
intermittent
twice a week
predicted
Asymptomatic between
exacerbations and brief
exacerbations 
Nighttime symptoms
< twice monthly
Mild
Symptoms between once
PEF > 80% of 
persistent
a day and twice a week
predicted
Asymptomatic between
exacerbations but
exacerbations may
limit activity
Nighttime symptoms
> twice monthly
Moderate
Daily symptoms
PEF 60-80% of 
persistent
Exacerbations limit activity
predicted
Nighttime symptoms
> weekly.
Severe
Continual symptoms
PEF < 60% of 
persistent
Symptoms chronically 
predicted
limit physical activity
Frequent nighttime
symptoms
PEF, peak expiratory flow.
Table 28–3. Test characteristics of symptoms for the
diagnosis of asthma.
Criteria
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Wheezing
74.7%
87.3%
5.77
0.29
Dyspnea at rest
47.1%
94.9%
9.23
0.56
Wheezing without
59.8%
93.6%
9.34
0.43
URI symptoms
Nocturnal dyspnea
46.2%
96%
11.55
0.56
Wheezing and
54.2%
95.7%
12.60
0.48
exertional dyspnea
Wheezing and
65.2%
95.1%
13.30
0.37
dyspnea
Wheezing and 
40.9%
97.5%
16.44
0.61
nocturnal chest
tightness
Wheezing and 
37.5%
98.6%
26.79
0.61
nocturnal dyspnea
Wheezing and 
38.4%
98.7%
29.54
0.62
dyspnea at rest
URI, upper respiratory infection.
Adapted with permission from Sistek D et al. Clinical diagnosis of current
asthma: predictive value of respiratory symptoms in the SAPALDIA study.
Swiss Study on Air Pollution and Lung Diseases in Adults. Eur Respir J.
2001;17:214–219.
FP
470 /  CHAPTER 28
2. PFTs should be done in all patients other than those with
mild disease and no diagnostic uncertainty.
3. Figure 28–1 show a schematic diagram of many of the
lung volumes, capacities, and flows measured in PFTs.
4. The following all support the diagnosis of asthma:
a. Decreased FEV1, the volume of air exhaled in the first
second during a forced expiratory maneuver.
b. Decreased FEV1/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio
c. Reversibility (defined as at least a 200 mL increase in
FEV1 and > 12% improvement with bronchodilators)
I. Other tests
1. Chest radiography is useful mainly in excluding other
diseases.
2. Methacholine challenge
a. Can be very helpful in diagnosing asthma in patients
who have a suspicious history but normal PFTs
b. A decrease in FEV1 of < 20% has a 95% negative pre-
dictive value.
Treatment
A. The goals of asthma therapy are to
1. Prevent chronic symptoms such as nighttime wakening
2. Maintain normal pulmonary function (assessed by PEF
and spirometry)
3. Maintain normal levels of physical activity. It can be chal-
lenging to achieve this goal. Many patients become accus-
tomed to being limited by their breathing and thus may
not report that their breathing limits their activity.
4. Prevent exacerbations
B. One of the first steps in treating asthma is to treat exacerbating
factors. These factors, some of which are listed below, are treated
with pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic interventions.
1. Tobacco use and secondhand smoke
2. Air pollution (ozone, SO2, NO2)
3. Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
4. Common allergens
5. Dander, dust, mold, insects
C. Medical therapy for asthma itself is aimed at treating the fac-
tors that cause the disease and its symptoms. The drugs are
summarized in Table 28–4.
D. A usual course of therapy follows:
1. Short-acting β2-agonists are used as needed for mild inter-
mittent asthma and exercise-induced asthma.
2. In patients with mild persistent asthma (or once a patient
is using short-acting β2-agonists more than twice weekly)
inhaled corticosteroids are added. The dose of inhaled cor-
ticosteroids is escalated for control of symptoms.
3. Long-acting β2-agonists are considered for control of
nocturnal symptoms and for maintenance after short-
acting β2-agonists and inhaled corticosteroids are used.
4. Because of data showing an increase in complications from
asthma in patients using long-acting β2-agonists alone,
these drugs should be reserved for patients already using
inhaled corticosteroids.
5. Leukotriene antagonists and theophylline can also be used
for maintenance after short-acting β2-agonists and inhaled
corticosteroids are used.
6. Systemic corticosteroids are reserved for the treatment of
exacerbations and refractory cases.
At each visit, review a patient’s medications and
carefully review symptoms. Focus on any limita-
tions of activity related to asthma.
IC
FRC
RV
ERV
VT
VC
TLC
Volume (L)
0
0
1
2
Time (sec)
3
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
FEV1
FEF25–75%
FVC
Figure 28–1. Pulmonary function tests. ERV, expiratory reserve volume; FEF 25–75%, forced expiratory flow meas-
ured during exhalation of 25–75% of the FVC; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FRC, functional reserve
capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity; IC, inspiratory capacity; RV, residual volume;TLC, total lung capacity;VC, vital
capacity;VT, tidal volume.
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  471
E. Refractory cases
1. Most cases of asthma can be well controlled. There are a
number of considerations if asthma is refractory to treat-
ment.
2. Is the patient compliant? This includes poor inhaler tech-
nique (which is very common) and poor understanding of
the use of maintenance and as-needed medications.
3. Are there unaccounted for or untreated precipitants?
(Consider GERD, sinusitis, and allergies.)
4. Is the diagnosis correct? (Consider other causes of chronic
intermittent airway obstruction such as those listed in the
algorithm at the end of this chapter.)
5. Are there rare diseases present that can cause or worsen
asthma? (Consider Churg-Strauss disease, allergic bron-
chopulmonary aspergillosis.)
F. Exacerbations
1. History
a. Duration of exacerbation
(1) Exacerbations that are very recent (hours) and
mild may improve with β-agonists alone while
more established and more severe exacerbations
require corticosteroids.
(2) Because early treatment leads to better outcomes, it
is important that patients monitor their own disease
and know how to initiate appropriate treatment and
contact their physician when necessary.
b. Precipitants
(1) Consider if there is a clear precipitant of the exac-
erbation that needs to be treated or removed (eg,
sinusitis, allergen exposure).
(2) Consider if there is an exacerbating factor that
hospital admission might avoid (eg, house paint-
ing, recent insect extermination).
c. Severity of disease. The following patients are at risk for
asthma-related death. Hospital admission is nearly
always indicated for patients with an exacerbation and
1 of these factors:
(1) History of sudden severe exacerbations
(2) Prior admission to an ICU
(3) Recent emergency department visits or hospital-
izations
(4) Use of more than 2 canisters of β-agonist in the
past month
(5) Current use or recent discontinuation of systemic
corticosteroids
(6) Difficulty perceiving airflow obstruction
(7) Comorbid medical or psychiatric disease
2. Physical exam
a. The lung exam is generally a poor marker of the sever-
ity of disease.
b. Lack of wheezing can either reflect improved or wors-
ening airflow.
Patients whose decreased wheezing is accompanied
by worsening distress or decreased mental status
probably have worsening airflow obstruction. Con-
versely, a patient whose decreased wheezing is
accompanied by lessened respiratory distress likely
has improved airflow obstruction.
3. Other tests
a. Chest radiograph is only helpful for identifying the
uncommon concomitant infection or complication
(eg, pneumothorax).
b. Spirometry is most helpful in determining severity of
exacerbation.
(1) A moderate exacerbation will have an FEV1 or PEF
50–80% of predicted and moderate symptoms.
(2) A severe exacerbation will have an FEV1 or PEF
50–80% of predicted with severe symptoms, phys-
ical findings, or concerning history.
Spirometry and the history of the patient’s prior
exacerbations are the most important pieces of
information for making admission decisions.
c. Arterial blood gases are useful in patients whose peak
flows are not improving with treatment. ABGs during
severe exacerbations should reveal a respiratory alkalo-
sis. A respiratory acidosis (or even a normal PCO2 dur-
ing a severe exacerbation) is very worrisome as it sug-
gests severe airway narrowing. 
Table 28–4. Pharmacotherapy of asthma.
Common Adverse 
Medication
Purpose
Effects
Short-acting
Immediate relief 
Tachycardia,
β2-agonists
of symptoms
jitteriness
Inhaled
Mainstay of long-
Thrush, dysphonia,
corticosteroids
term therapy
potentially
osteopenia at high
doses
Long-acting
Long-term therapy 
Tachycardia,
β2-agonists
when inhaled
jitteriness
corticosteroids have
not adequately
controlled symptoms 
Useful for nocturnal
symptoms
Leukotriene
Long-term therapy 
No significant 
antagonists
when inhaled
adverse effects
corticosteroids have
not improved symptoms
Systemic
Immediate therapy 
Traditional 
corticosteroids
for exacerbations or
corticosteroid side
long-term therapy in
effects (weight 
patients with refractory
gain, hyper-
asthma
glycemia, bone 
loss)
Theophylline
Similar to long-
Dose-related 
acting β2-agonists
tachycardia,
but used less frequently
nausea, jitteriness
472 /  CHAPTER 28
4. Treatment of exacerbations
a. Figure 28–2 is adapted from the NIH/NHLBI
Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of
Asthma and is a guide to the management of asthma
exacerbations.
b. Recognize that the differentiation of mild, moderate
and severe exacerbations is based not only on spirome-
try but on history and physical as well.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Mr. C’s clinical history is consistent with asthma. He has intermit-
tent symptoms of wheezing, dyspnea, and chest tightness. Multiple
points in his history raise the probability of asthma as the diagnosis.
These include the childhood history of asthma and the exacerbat-
ing factors. His normal peak flow does not exclude the diagnosis
because he is presently symptomatic. At this point, a diagnostic and
therapeutic trial of asthma medication would be reasonable.
PEF, peak expiratory flow.
Poor response
Good response
Good response
Poor response
Signs and symptoms
of mild to moderate
exacerbation
(PEF > 50% predicted)
Consider discharge
with increased β-agonist
and new or increased
dose of inhaled
corticosteroids 
Peak flow > 70%
predicted, sustained
response to β-agonists
Discharge with inhaled
corticosteroids, β-agonists  
and course of oral  
corticosteroids
Peak flow < 70%
predicted, risk factors
for poor outcome
Probable admission 
for continued
corticosteroids,
nebulizer treatment, and
close observation
Signs and symptoms
of severe
exacerbation
(PEF < 50% predicted)
Moderate
exacerbation
(PEF  50–80%)
Add
corticosteroids
Mild
exacerbation
(PEF > 80%)
Admit to hospital with
consideration given to
ICU care based on
airflow, history,
PCO2 > 41
Severe
exacerbation
(PEF < 50%)
Treat with β-agonist
nebulizer, oxygen
as needed
Treat with β-agonist
and anticholinergic
nebulizer, systemic
corticosteroids, oxygen
as needed.
Initial history and
physical exam
including spirometry
Figure 28–2. Initial evaluation and treatment of an asthma exacerbation.
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  473
1
Mr. C was given an albuterol inhaler. He was told to use 2
puffs as needed as well as about 30 minutes before exer-
cise or expected animal exposure. On follow-up 6 weeks
later, Mr. C reported improvement in his symptoms. He was
able to exercise without difficulty as long as he was using
his inhalers and could spend short amounts of time around
friends’ pets. He suffered one upper respiratory tract
infection during the last 6 weeks. He found his symptoms
worse during this time. On average, he was using his inhaler
about 4 times daily with good relief of symptoms.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, asthma? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
Because asthma is very common and the initial
treatment is benign, the treatment threshold is low.
A therapeutic and diagnostic trial of medication is
nearly always appropriate.
CASE RESOLUTION
The patient’s history and response to therapy confirms the diag-
nosis of asthma. The patient has no nasal symptoms that would
suggest allergic rhinitis. COPD is unlikely without a smoking his-
tory. Vocal cord dysfunction will be discussed below and is also
unlikely. Heart failure (HF) is unlikely given the patient’s age, the
absence of a history of heart disease, and his response to bron-
chodilators.
1
Given the frequency of his use of albuterol, the patient
was given low-dose inhaled corticosteroids. His symp-
toms subsequently improved with only rare need for
albuterol. The following year, Mr. C’s symptoms worsened
after a move into a new house. His asthma was eventu-
ally controlled with higher doses of inhaled corticos-
teroids. He was able to wean these medications after he
had carpets in his house replaced with hardwood floors.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 2
Mrs. P is a 62-year-old woman who arrives at the emer-
gency department with shortness of breath and wheez-
ing. She says that the symptoms have been present for
3 days. The symptoms are present both at rest and with
exertion and have not improved with an albuterol inhaler.
She reports that she has had these symptoms inter-
mittently for 6 years. When the symptoms occur, they
generally last for hours to a few days. She had been diag-
nosed with asthma and took long- and short-acting
β-agonists and inhaled and systemic corticosteroids,
before coming off all medications 1 year ago. She stopped
her medications herself out of frustration with side
effects and perceived lack of efficacy. She decided
instead to treat herself with yoga and meditation. She
reports no episodes since this decision.
Presently she denies cough, chest pain, fever, or rhinitis.
She does report hoarseness that occurs when her
breathing is bad.
Past medical history is remarkable only for depres-
sion and hypertension. Her only medication is enalapril.
She has no known drug allergies. She does not smoke
cigarettes.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there
a must not miss diagnosis? Given this dif-
ferential diagnosis, what tests should be
ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
As discussed above, asthma is very common and should be consid-
ered in anyone with intermittent pulmonary symptoms. There are
some pivotal points in Mrs. P’s history that argue against asthma.
Her symptoms did not improve with a β-agonist and it seems that
she came off an aggressive asthma regimen without ill effects. The
patient also describes hoarseness associated with her symptoms; this
would be atypical for asthma in which hoarseness only occurs if there
is associated GERD, postnasal drip, or thrush caused by inhaled cor-
ticosteroids. PVCM is a syndrome of episodic adduction of the vocal
cords producing wheezing and stridor. The lack of response to bron-
chodilators and associated hoarseness are clues to this diagnosis.
GERD is a very common diagnosis (see Chapter 8, Chest Pain). It
can cause and worsen asthma and can cause hoarseness via irritation
of the vocal cords. Angioedema occurs when vascular permeability
increases leading to swelling of subcutaneous tissues. Airway com-
promise can occur. It is usually associated with other signs such as
facial swelling, tongue swelling, or hives. Table 28–5 lists the differ-
ential diagnosis.
2
On further history, she reports that her present symp-
toms are moderate for her. 
On physical exam, the patient is in some respiratory
distress. Her voice is hoarse and “squeaky.” Her vital
signs are temperature, 37.1°C; pulse, 110 bpm; BP, 140/90
mm Hg; RR, 32 breaths per minute. There is a harsh
wheeze heard throughout the lungs that is loudest in the
anterior neck. The remainder of the physical exam was
normal.
PEF is 300 L/min, 70% of predicted.
474 /  CHAPTER 28
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
Leading Hypothesis: PVCM
Textbook Presentation
PVCM typically presents as episodic attacks of respiratory distress
accompanied by wheezing or stridor or both. The respiratory dis-
tress is often accompanied by voice pathology and a lack of
response to traditional asthma therapy.
Disease Highlights
A. PVCM has gone by many names including vocal cord dys-
function, episodic laryngeal dyskinesia, Munchausen stridor,
psychogenic stridor, and factitious asthma.
B. Most commonly occurs in younger patients (< 35 years) but
can be seen in any age.
C. Female predominance
D. The symptoms are not produced consciously.
E. During asymptomatic disease, there are no abnormalities of
lung function:
1. Spirometry is normal.
2. There is none of the increased variability in airway func-
tion seen with asthma.
3. Bronchoprovocation tests are normal.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. Given the prevalence of asthma and the similarity of the pres-
entation, asthma needs to be excluded in any patient with
PVCM. This is especially true as the 2 disorders may coexist.
B. Clues to the differentiation of the diseases are:
1. The lack of exacerbating factors (eg, exercise, allergens)
and diurnal variation seen with asthma.
2. The lack of response to asthma medications.
3. The occasional disappearance of symptoms during sleep.
4. The striking voice pathology during attacks.
5. The preponderance of auscultatory findings in the neck.
6. A flattened inspiratory limb on flow-volume loops sug-
gesting variable extrathoracic airway obstruction.
C. The definitive diagnosis is made on laryngoscopy.
1. There is adduction of the vocal cords often leaving only a
diamond-shaped opening between the cords during flares.
2. There is generally normal vocal cord function between flares.
Treatment
A. There are no controlled trials of treatments for PVCM.
B. Speech therapy, concentrating on laryngeal relaxation seems
to be the most effective therapy.
C. Psychiatric intervention is suggested for patients with psychi-
atric illness.
D. Acute attacks may be quite hard to manage.
1. Helium/oxygen mixtures have been suggested to obtain
better flow through the narrowed larynx though there is
no evidence to support its utility.
2. Instructing the patient to lay his tongue on the floor of the
mouth and breathe through pursed lips may also help.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
2
Given Mrs. P’s history and physical findings, PVCM was
suspected, but the history of asthma and the severity of
the dyspnea were concerning. An albuterol nebulizer was
started and an otolaryngologist was called to evaluate
the patient.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, PVCM? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
The diagnosis of PVCM is certainly likely given the patient’s his-
tory and physical exam findings. Asthma still needs to be ruled out
with spirometry and, if necessary, bronchoprovocation. The other
important diagnosis to consider is angioedema.
Asthma is significantly more prevalent than
PVCM. Any patient in whom the diagnosis of
PVCM is considered should have asthma ruled out.
Table 28–5. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. P.
Hypotheses
Diagnostic 
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis 
Paradoxical vocal
Episodic airflow 
Laryngoscopy
cord movement 
obstruction
demonstrating 
associated
abnormal vocal
with stridor
cord movement
Active Alternative—Most Common
Asthma
Episodic and
Peak flow
reversible airflow
PFTs
obstruction
Methacholine 
challenge
Response to treatment
Active Alternative
Gastroesophageal
May cause or worsen 
Identification of
reflux disease
asthma and cause
esophageal and 
voice pathology
laryngeal abnormalities 
on endoscopy
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Angioedema 
Often associated with
Clinical presentation 
hives and causative
with or without risk 
exposure
factors
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  475
Alternative Diagnosis: Angioedema
Textbook Presentation
The presentation of angioedema is usually an acute swelling of soft
tissue, especially the face, lips, tongue, larynx, or foreskin. Patients
nearly always have a history of angioedema or a risk factor for it.
Disease Highlights
A. The onset of angioedema is usually rapid, over minutes to
hours.
B. Angioedema may be caused by:
1. ACE inhibitors
2. Allergic reactions
3. Hereditary and acquired forms of C1-inhibitor deficiency
C. The presentation can range from mild, only sensed by the
patient; to disfiguring, obvious to the casual observer; to life-
threatening laryngeal involvement.
D. The diverse causes of angioedema produce symptoms by dif-
ferent mechanisms, have different presentations, and different
treatments.
1. Histamine-related angioedema
a. Almost always accompanied by pruritus and urticaria
(hives).
b. Usually related to an allergic exposure such as an insect
bite or a food.
c. Urticaria can also be chronic, caused by allergy, drug
effect, autoimmune phenomena, or malignancy.
2. Nonhistamine-related angioedema (caused by elevated
levels of bradykinin)
a. Most commonly the result of ACE inhibitor therapy
b. Deficiency of C1-inhibitor also causes elevated
bradykinin levels as well as elevated C2b levels, another
cause of angioedema.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. A diagnosis of angioedema is clinical, based on the recogni-
tion of angioedema and associated symptoms.
B. Angioedema most commonly presents as swelling of the lips,
tongue, or both.
C. Figure 28–3 presents a useful algorithm for considering the
differential diagnosis and treatment of angioedema.
Treatment
A. The most critical aspect of the management of angioedema is
airway stabilization.
B. All patients receive H1- and H2-blockers as well as corticos-
teroids.
C. Patients with airway compromise or any intraoral swelling
should also receive epinephrine.
Evaluate for
autoimmune causes of
urticaria if episodes are
persistent or recurrent
Discontinue
medication
Counsel on future
avoidance
Evaluate for
complement deficiency
(C4, C2, C1q,
C1-inhibitor)
Is there a clear
external cause
(allergen)?
Yes
No
Does the patient
have hives or other
symptoms of an
allergic reaction?
Angioedema
diagnosed by
physical exam
Yes
No
Is the patient taking
medications known to
cause angioedema
(ACE-I, NSAIDs)?
Yes
No
ACE-I, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors; NSAIDs, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.
Figure 28–3. Differential diagnosis and treatment of angioedema.
476 /  CHAPTER 28
D. Patients need to be closely monitored because intubation is
sometimes necessary.
E. Patients with C1-inhibitor deficiency can be treated with
androgens, which increase the production of C1-inhibitor, or
C1-inhibitor concentrate.
CASE RESOLUTION
2
A helium oxygen mixture was given to the patient briefly
before laryngoscopy was performed. The findings on 
laryngoscopy were consistent with PVCM. The patient
was counseled in the emergency department on ways to
improve her airflow and symptoms subsided over the next
hour. The patient spent 2 days in the hospital, experienc-
ing only 1 mild episode of dyspnea during the period of
observation.
The findings on laryngoscopy are diagnostic of PVCM. Except for
ACE inhibitor therapy, there is little evidence or history support-
ing angioedema; the patient has no facial swelling, and there are
no consistent findings on laryngoscopy.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 3
Mr. S is a 50-year-old man who arrives at the emergency
department with sore throat, fever, and wheezing. He
reports being well until 2 days ago when his sore throat
started. Over the next 2 days, the sore throat became
progressively more severe and he lost his voice. On the
morning of admission, a fever of 38.0°C and wheezing
developed. He was also unable to eat because of the pain.
He has never had similar symptoms before.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
what are the active alternatives, and is there a
must not miss diagnosis? Given this differen-
tial diagnosis, what tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The pivotal points in Mr. S’ presentation are the acuity of the illness
and the fever. Both of these points make an infectious etiology
likely. Because the symptoms are not recurrent, asthma, the most
common cause of airway obstruction, is unlikely. Acute infectious
causes need to be considered first. These include common condi-
tions, such as pharyngitis, and rare but serious causes, such as
epiglottitis and retropharyngeal abscess. Angioedema is a possibility,
but the infectious symptoms (fever and pain) and the lack of visible
swelling make this less likely. Aspiration of a foreign body could
cause either a pneumonia or infection of the soft tissues of the neck
resulting in fever. Table 28–6 lists the differential diagnosis.
3
On physical exam, Mr. S is in obvious distress. He is
uncomfortable, is sitting upright, and speaks in a muffled
voice. His vitals signs are temperature, 38.3°C; pulse,
110 bpm; BP, 128/88 mm Hg; RR, 18 breaths per minute.
Examination of the oropharynx is notable only for mild
tonsillar edema without exudates. There is diffuse cervi-
cal lymphadenopathy and significant tenderness over the
anterior neck. The neck is supple. Lungs are clear, but
there is stridor transmitted from the neck.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
The patient’s physical exam makes pharyngitis a less likely cause of
his symptoms. His pharynx is patent, and there is more distal stridor.
Leading Hypothesis: Epiglottitis
Textbook Presentation
Fever and sore throat are usually the presenting symptoms. There
can be evidence of varying degrees of airway obstruction includ-
ing wheezing, stridor, and drooling. The disease has become
Table 28–6. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mr. S.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
Pharyngitis
Sore throat often
Clinical exam
with fever, exudates
Throat culture
and lymphadenopathy
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
Epiglottitis
Sore throat with
Direct 
muffled voice, stridor,
visualization with 
and anterior neck
laryngoscopy
tenderness
Retropharyngeal
Similar to 
Lateral neck 
abscess
epiglottitis with
radiograph or CT scan
more prominent
of the neck
neck symptoms
(stiff, painful)
Other Alternative
Foreign body
Usually history of 
Documentation of 
aspiration 
acute-onset pain or
foreign body directly
airway obstruction
or radiographically
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  477
significantly less common in children since the use of the
Haemophilus influenzae B vaccine.
Disease Highlights
A. Epiglottitis is an infectious disease, classically caused by H
influenzae, that causes swelling of the epiglottis and supraglot-
tic structures.
B. Can rapidly cause airway compromise so the diagnosis is
always considered an airway emergency.
C. Classic presentation is a patient with sore throat, muffled “hot
potato” voice, drooling, and stridor.
D. H influenzae is cultured in only a small percentage of adult
patients; respiratory viruses are the likely cause of most cases
of epiglottitis.
E. Epiglottitis is a difficult diagnosis because initial presentation
is often identical to pharyngitis.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The gold standard for diagnosis is visual identification of
swelling of the epiglottis. 
1. Otolaryngology consultation is thus mandatory in any
patient with a high suspicion for the disease. 
2. Visualization can be achieved with direct or indirect
laryngoscopy.
3. In patients with signs of severe disease (eg, muffled voice,
drooling, and stridor), an experienced physician should
perform direct laryngoscopy and be prepared to intubate
the patient or perform a tracheostomy (if airway control
cannot be obtained).
B. The classic symptoms of muffled voice, drooling, and stridor
are seen very rarely and signify imminent airway obstruction.
1. Sitting erect and stridor are independent predictors of
subsequent airway intervention (RRs of 4.8 and 6.2,
respectively).
2. In 1 study of patients with epiglottitis, the test character-
istics of sitting erect at presentation and stridor were as
follows:
a. Sitting erect at presentation: Sensitivity, 47%; speci-
ficity, 90%; LR+, 4.7; LR−. 0.59. 
b. Stridor: Sensitivity, 42%; specificity, 94%; LR+, 7;
LR−, 0.61.
C. Common symptoms and signs of patients with epiglottitis are
shown in Table 28–7.
D. Lateral neck films, a commonly used diagnostic tool, have a
sensitivity of about 90%. The classic finding is the “thumb
sign” of a swollen epiglottis.
A normal lateral neck film does not rule out
epiglottitis. Laryngoscopy should be performed in a
patient with a high clinical suspicion of epiglottitis,
even if the neck film is normal.
Treatment
A. Airway control
1. All patients should be admitted to the ICU for close
monitoring.
2. Patients with signs or symptoms of airway obstruction
should be intubated electively.
3. Elective intubation is preferred because intubation in a
patient with epiglottitis can be very difficult.
4. Some advocate prophylactic intubation of all patients.
Epiglottitis is an airway emergency. Patients need to
be monitored extremely closely and not left alone
until the airway is stable. Otolaryngology consulta-
tion is mandatory.
B. Antibiotics
1. Necessary to cover H influenzae.
2. Second- or third-generation cephalosporins are usually
recommended.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
Mr. S’s history is very concerning. His upright posture, voice
changes, and stridor are not only indicative of epiglottitis but also
of imminent airway closure. None of these findings would be seen
with pharyngitis. Foreign-body aspiration does not fit the history.
Retropharyngeal abscess remains a possibility.
3
Given the concern for epiglottitis, lateral neck films were
obtained, and an otolaryngologist was called to examine
the patient’s upper airway.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, epiglottitis? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alterna-
tive diagnoses?
Table 28–7. Prevalence of the signs and symptoms of
epiglottitis.
Symptoms and Signs
Frequency
Sore throat
95%
Odynophagia
94%
Muffled voice
54%
Pharyngitis
44%
Fever
42%
Cervical adenopathy
41%
Dyspnea
37%
Drooling
30%
Sitting erect
16%
Stridor
12%
Reproduced from Frantz TD, Rasgon BM, Quesenberry CP Jr. Acute epiglot-
titis in adults. Analysis of 129 cases. JAMA. 1994;272:1358–1360. Copy-
right © 1994. American Medical Association. All rights reserved.
478 /  CHAPTER 28
Alternative Diagnosis:
Retropharyngeal Abscess
Textbook Presentation
Retropharyngeal abscess can be seen in either children or adults.
Patients usually have symptoms similar to those seen in epiglotti-
tis but commonly have a history of a recent upper respiratory
infection or trauma from recently ingested materials (bones), or
procedures (pulmonary or GI endoscopy).
Disease Highlights
A. Symptoms that suggest retropharyngeal abscess rather than
epiglottitis are:
1. Patients with retropharyngeal abscesses often will sense a
lump in their throat.
2. Patients are often most comfortable supine with neck
extended (very different from epiglottitis).
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of retropharyngeal abscess is made when a
thickening of the retropharyngeal tissues is seen on lateral
neck radiographs.
B. Radiographs are probably not 100% sensitive, so when radi-
ographs are normal and clinical suspicion is high, CT scan-
ning should be done to verify the diagnosis.
Treatment
A. Retropharyngeal abscesses are usually polymicrobial.
B. Treatment is both medical and surgical.
1. Surgical drainage should be accomplished as soon as possible.
2. Many antibiotics have been suggested. Coverage of gram-
positive organisms and anaerobes make clindamycin a com-
mon choice.
CASE RESOLUTION
3
The patient’s lateral neck radiograph showed probable
acute epiglottitis with a thumb sign. An otolaryngologist
visualized the epiglottis and, given the patient’s symp-
toms and severity of the visualized airway obstruction,
placed an endotracheal tube. Mr. S was admitted to the
ICU and treated with a second-generation cephalosporin.
Cultures of the blood and epiglottis were negative.
The patient’s infection was diagnosed on the lateral neck radi-
ographs. Intubation was necessary because the patient had signs
and symptoms of airway obstruction and the actual obstruction
was visualized on laryngoscopy.
CHIEF COMPLAINT
PATIENT 4
Mrs. A is 52-year-old woman who comes to your office
with shortness of breath and wheezing. She reports that
her symptoms have been present for about 2 years. She
reports almost constant, mild dyspnea that is worst
with exercise or when she has a cold. Only rarely does she
feel “nearly normal.” She also complains of a mild cough
productive of clear sputum. She does not feel that her
cough is much of a problem as it is significantly better
since she stopped smoking 2 years ago.
At this point, what is the leading hypothesis,
and what are the active alternatives? What
other tests should be ordered?
PRIORITIZING THE DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
The pivotal points in this case are the patient’s chronic dyspnea
wheezing, and smoking history. COPD and asthma should be
high in the differential diagnosis. HF is also a possibility. The
patient’s smoking history is a risk factor for coronary disease, the
most common cause of HF, and she suffers from nearly constant
dyspnea that is worse with exertion. As noted in Chapter 14, Dyspnea,
HF frequently complicates COPD or is misdiagnosed as the
pulmonary disease. Bronchiectasis could cause symptoms of
dyspnea, cough, and sputum production, but the patient’s sputum
production seems to be a minor symptom, unlike what is usually
seen in bronchiectasis. Tuberculosis (TB) should probably be con-
sidered in the differential, since it can cause chronic cough and
dyspnea. Given the chronic nature of the symptoms, if TB were
the cause, we would expect to hear about weight loss and other
constitutional signs. Table 28–8 lists the differential diagnosis.
4
Mrs. A reports a 60 pack-year history of smoking. She
stopped 2 years ago, after smoking 2 packs a day for
30 years, when her chronic cough began to worry her. She
reports that she still coughs but only rarely brings up
sputum.
She has not experienced fever, chills, weight loss, or
peripheral edema. She does say that when her breathing is
bad it is worse when lying down. She has never had symp-
toms consistent with paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
Orthopnea is a very nonspecific symptom. It is
found in many types of cardiopulmonary disease.
Is the clinical information sufficient to make
a diagnosis? If not, what other information
do you need?
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  479
Leading Hypothesis: COPD
Textbook Presentation
Presenting symptoms of COPD include progressive dyspnea,
decreased exercise tolerance, cough, and sputum production. The
onset is usually slow and progressive with occasional acute exacer-
bations. A long smoking history is present in almost all patients
with COPD who live in industrialized countries.
Disease Highlights
A. COPD is defined in the WHO/NHLBI Global Strategy for
the Diagnosis, Management, and Prevention of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease as a “disease state character-
ized by airflow limitation that is not fully reversible. The air-
flow limitation is usually both progressive and associated with
an abnormal inflammatory response of the lungs to noxious
particles or gases.”
B. COPD should be considered in any patient with a smoking his-
tory who has pulmonary complaints. These complaints can be:
1. Mild (smokers’ cough or lingering colds)
2. Moderate (chronic cough, sputum production, and dyspnea)
3. Severe (activity-limiting dyspnea with life-threatening
exacerbations)
C. COPD can also be seen in patients without a smoking history
but with significant exposure to secondhand smoke, occupa-
tional dust and chemicals and, especially in less developed
countries, indoor air pollution from cooking stoves.
D. Because of the wide variation in disease course, it is impossible
to give an average amount of exposure necessary to cause disease.
1. Pulmonary symptoms usually develop after about 10 years
of exposure.
2. Airflow obstruction may develop later.
E. Diagnosis of early, minimally symptomatic COPD is impor-
tant because it may allow for more appropriate treatment of
mild symptoms (cough) and may provide extra incentive for
smoking cessation.
F. Emphysema and chronic bronchitis are currently being used
less as descriptors of types of COPD.
1. Emphysema is a pathologic term not accurately correlating
with its general clinical usage.
2. Chronic bronchitis is the presence of mucus production
for most days of the month, 3 months of a year, for 2 suc-
cessive years. This symptom does not relate to the airflow
obstruction that causes the morbidity in COPD.
3. Due to the overlap and lack of specificity of these 2 terms,
COPD should be used as the diagnostic term.
G. Two staging systems provide a way of categorizing patients by
symptoms and prognosis.
1. The WHO/NHLBI outlines stages of COPD (Table 28–9)
that are useful for both diagnosis and management of
patients. They are based mainly on spirometry and are thus
very easy to use.
2. Other indices, such as the BODE index, take into account
other patient features, such as body mass index, degree of
dyspnea, and exercise tolerance, and are very useful
prognostically.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of COPD is based on history, physical exam,
and ancillary tests (primarily PFTs). 
B. Important aspects of the history are:
1. Smoker’s cough
2. Lingering colds
Table 28–8. Diagnostic hypotheses for Mrs. A.
Diagnostic
Hypotheses
Clinical Clues
Important Tests
Leading Hypothesis
COPD
Chronic irreversible
Spirometry and
airway obstruction
sometimes imaging 
with a smoking history
Active Alternative—Most Common
Asthma
Episodic and reversible
Peak flow
airflow obstruction
PFTs
Methacholine
challenge
Response to treatment
Active Alternative—Must Not Miss
HF
Presence of risk factors
Echocardiography
and consistent physical
exam findings
Other Alternative
Bronchiectasis
Chronic, heavy, purulent
CT scan of the chest
sputum production
Table 28–9. WHO/NHLBI stages of COPD.
Stage
Spirometry
Symptoms
0 At Risk
Normal
Chronic cough and
sputum production
1
FEV1/FVC < 70% 
Chronic cough and sputum
Mild COPD
FEV1 > 80%
production often without
dyspnea
2A
FEV1 = 50–80%
Chronic dyspnea possibly 
Moderate
with intermittent 
COPD
exacerbations
2B
FEV1 = 30–50%
Chronic dyspnea probably
Moderate
with intermittent 
COPD
exacerbations
3
FEV1 < 30%
Also may be diagnosed 
Severe
with PaO2 < 60 mm Hg,
COPD
PaCO2 > 50 mm Hg or cor
pulmonale
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1/FVC, forced expiratory
volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity.
Pauwels RA, Buist AS, Calverley PM, Hurd SS. Global strategy for the diagnosis,
management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
NHLBI/WHO Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (GOLD)
Workshop Summary. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2001. 163: 1256–1276.
480 /  CHAPTER 28
3. Chronic cough
4. Sputum production
5. Dyspnea
6. Decreased exercise tolerance
C. Physical exam
1. The physical exam is useful mainly in patients with more
advanced disease.
2. No findings are sensitive enough to exclude a diagnosis of
COPD.
3. The test characteristics for some of the physical exam find-
ings are listed in Table 28–10.
The absence of wheezing does not rule out, or even
significantly decrease the likelihood of, COPD.
D. Spirometry
1. Because the results of spirometry are part of the informa-
tion required to make a diagnosis of COPD, test charac-
teristics cannot be calculated.
2. For the diagnosis of COPD, the most important spiro-
metric values are postbronchodilator, since COPD is
defined by irreversible airway obstruction.
3. Typically PFTs in COPD reveal:
a. Increased total lung capacity secondary to decreased
elastic recoil
b. Increased functional residual capacity and residual vol-
ume secondary to air trapping
c. Decreased FEV1 and FVC due to airflow obstruction
d. Decreased DLCO secondary to destruction of the
oxygen/Hgb interface.
E. Other tests
1. Spirometry with bronchodilator response is recommended
to rule out asthma. Patients with completely reversible air-
flow obstruction likely have asthma.
2. Chest radiograph is generally not useful in diagnosing COPD.
a. Some findings are suggestive
(1) Upper lobe bullous disease (uncommon but nearly
diagnostic)
(2) Flattened diaphragm on the lateral chest radiograph
(3) Large retrosternal air space
(4) Hyperlucency of the lungs
(5) Diminished distal vascular markings
b. Chest radiography is always recommended to rule out
other causes of symptoms.
3. ABG measurement is recommended in patients with
FEV1 < 40% predicted or with right-sided heart failure.
4. Testing for α1-antitrypsin deficiency (a rare cause of
COPD) is recommended in patients:
a. In whom COPD develops before age 45 years
b. Who do not have a smoking history or suspicious exposure
In general, any patient with a smoking history who
complains of chronic cough, sputum production,
or dyspnea should be considered to have COPD if
no other diagnosis can be made. Additional testing
can help establish the diagnosis and assess severity.
Treatment
A. Management of stable disease
1. Nonpharmacologic and preventive therapy
a. Smoking cessation or removal of other inhaled toxic agents
b. Exercise programs if allowable from a cardiovascular
standpoint
c. Vaccination against influenza and pneumococcal
pneumonia
2. Pharmacologic
a. Anticholinergic inhalers ipratropium or tiotropium
(1) Mainstay of therapy
(2) Initial therapy for symptomatic patients
(3) Also recommended for patients with FEV1 < 50%
of predicted regardless of symptoms
(4) Recent data suggest that these medications
increase the risk of cardiovascular events.
b. β-Agonists
(1) Short-acting medications are useful if the patient’s
response to anticholinergic inhalers is insufficient.
(a) Can be used as-needed or on a scheduled basis
(b) Combinations with anticholinergic inhalers
are useful
(2) Long-acting medications are especially useful for
treatment of nocturnal symptoms.
c. Theophylline
(1) May be used in patients with inadequate response to
long-acting β-agonists and anticholinergic inhalers
(2) Narrow therapeutic window limits usefulness
d. Inhaled corticosteroids
(1) Use remains somewhat controversial
(2) There is some evidence that inhaled corticosteroids
decrease symptoms and reduce the frequency of
exacerbations.
Table 28–10. Test characteristics for physical exam
findings in COPD.
Criteria
Sensitivity
Specificity
LR+
LR−
Subxiphoid cardiac 
4–27%
97–99%
≈8
≈1
impulse
Absent cardiac 
15%
99%
15
≈1
dullness LLSB
Diaphragmatic 
13%
98%
6.5
≈1
excursion < 2 cm
Early inspiratory crackles
25–77%
97–98%
8–38.5
≈1
Any unforced wheeze
13–56%
86–99%
1–56
≈1
COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; LLSB, left lower sternal border.
Modified from McGee SR. Evidence-based physical diagnosis. Philadelphia,
PA: Saunders, 2001:382. With permission from Elsevier.
FP
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  481
(3) They do not seem to effect the rate of decline in
pulmonary function and may increase rates of
pneumonia.
e. Home oxygen is recommended for persons with
chronic hypoxia or cor pulmonale.
B. Management of exacerbations
1. Evaluation
a. Patients who are likely to have the worst outcomes have
low baseline FEV1, PaO2, pH, and high PCO2. Dis-
charge of such patients from an emergency department
should be done with great care.
b. Exacerbating factors
(1) Factors that likely led to the COPD exacerbation
should be sought and addressed during treatment.
(2) Historical evidence of infection or exposure (air
pollution, ozone) should be sought.
(3) All patients should have a chest radiograph to look
for pneumonia.
(4) As discussed in Chapter 14, Dyspnea, if a cause of
the exacerbation is not found, consideration
should be given to pulmonary embolism. 
c. Unlike in the assessment of asthma exacerbations, spirom-
etry is of little value in making admission decisions.
2. Therapy
a. Anticholinergic inhalers should be given to all patients
with addition of β-agonists if necessary.
b. Systemic corticosteroids are effective when given for up
to 2 weeks. There is no evidence that inhaled corticos-
teroids are effective.
3. Antibiotics are effective for more severe exacerbations. It is
unclear which the most effective antibiotic is.
4. Oxygen therapy is beneficial.
a. Oxygen does carry a risk of hypercapnia and respiratory
failure.
b. The development of respiratory failure is somewhat
predictable.
c. The following equation identifies patients who are at
high risk for CO2 retention and for requiring mechan-
ical ventilation: pH = 7.66 −0.00919 × PaO2. If the
calculated pH is greater than the patients true pH, he
is at high risk for being intubated. Sensitivity is ≈80%.
If a patient with a COPD exacerbation requires
oxygen, it should be provided and not withheld for
fear of causing CO2 retention. If respiratory failure
does ensue, it is caused by COPD and not by the
physician who administered the oxygen.
5. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (eg, bilevel posi-
tive airway pressure) decreases rates of intubation, length
of stay, and in-hospital mortality in patients with severe
exacerbation.
6. Mucolytics, theophylline, and chest physiotherapy have
no role in the treatment of COPD exacerbations.
MAKING A DIAGNOSIS
4
On the physical exam, Mrs. A appears well. Her vital signs
are normal. The only findings on lung exam are decreased
breath sounds and a prolonged expiratory phase. Her
chest radiograph is normal. Some of the results of her
PFTs are shown in Table 28–11.
Have you crossed a diagnostic threshold for
the leading hypothesis, COPD? Have you
ruled out the active alternatives? Do other
tests need to be done to exclude the alter-
native diagnoses?
The patient’s history and physical exam is certainly consistent with the
diagnosis of COPD. She has a smoking history, persistent cough, and
dyspnea. Her physical exam reveals findings of decreased breath
sounds. The chest radiograph does not argue for another diagnosis.
Her PFTs are also supportive of the diagnosis. Most impor-
tantly, there is an irreversible decrease in airflow. The severity of
disease is surprising given the patient’s mild symptoms. The low
DLCO (carbon monoxide diffusing capacity), suggests loss of a
portion of the Hgb/air interface.
Asthma and HF, the alternative diagnoses, are very unlikely.
The irreversibility of the airway disease excludes asthma as a
potential cause. The lack of purulent sputum excludes bronchiec-
tasis. HF remains a much less likely possibility not supported by
the PFTs.
Table 28–11. Pulmonary function test results for Mrs. A.
Prebronchodilator
Postbronchodilator
Test
Result
% of Predicted
Result
% Change
Total lung capacity (L)
6.92
128
Forced vital capacity (L)
3.03
91
2.90
−4.0
FEV1 (L)
1.03
43
1.00
−4.0
FEV1/FVC (%)
34
NA
34
0
DLCO (mL/min/mm Hg)
50
DLCO, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity of the lungs; FEV1/FVC, forced expiratory volume in 1 second/forced vital capacity.
482 /  CHAPTER 28
Alternative Diagnosis: Bronchiectasis
Textbook Presentation
Dyspnea and chronic, purulent sputum production are usually
present in patients with bronchiectasis. There is usually a history
of a chronic infection that has led to airway destruction.
Disease Highlights
A. Chronic sputum production is the hallmark of the clinical
presentation of bronchiectasis.
B. The disease is caused by the combination of an airway infec-
tion and an inability to clear this infection because of
impaired immunity or anatomic abnormality (congenital or
acquired). Bronchiectasis can be the result of common (viral
infection) or rare (Kartagener syndrome) diseases.
1. Pertussis and TB were the classic causes of bronchiectasis.
2. Some of the common causes now are:
a. Postviral, often with lymphadenopathy causing airway
obstruction
b. Aspergillus fumigatus, mainly in association with aller-
gic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
c. Mycobacterium avium complex infection, usually caus-
ing middle lobe disease
d. Cystic fibrosis
e. HIV
C. The most common bacteria isolated from the sputum of peo-
ple with bronchiectasis are H influenzae, Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, and Streptococcus pneumoniae.
D. Complications of the disease include hemoptysis and rarely
amyloidosis, given the chronic levels of inflammation.
Evidence-Based Diagnosis
A. The diagnosis of bronchiectasis depends on recognizing the
clinical symptoms (chronic sputum production) and demon-
strating airway destruction, usually by high-resolution CT
scanning.
B. Symptoms and their prevalence
1. Dyspnea and wheezing, 75%
2. Pleuritic chest pain, 50%
C. Signs and their prevalence
1. Crackles, 70%
2. Wheezing, 34%
D. Differentiation of bronchiectasis from COPD can sometimes
be difficult because both may present with cough, sputum
production, dyspnea, and airflow limitation. Important
points in the differentiation are as follows:
1. Sputum production is heavy and chronic in bronchiec-
tasis, while it is only truly purulent in COPD during
exacerbations.
2. There is usually a smoking history associated with COPD.
3. Spirometry is not helpful since bronchiectasis can cause
both airflow limitation and airway hyperreactivity.
4. Imaging (CT scan) will show diagnostic airway changes in
bronchiectasis. In COPD, imaging may or may not
demonstrate parenchymal destruction.
Treatment
A. Antibiotics are used both to treat flares of disease and to sup-
press chronic infection.
B. Pulmonary hygiene
1. Chest physiotherapy
2. There may be a role for bronchodilators, mucolytics, and
antiinflammatory medication.
C. Surgery is mainly used to treat airway obstruction, to remove
destroyed and chronically infected lung tissue, and to treat
life-threatening hemoptysis.
CASE RESOLUTION
Given the minor role that sputum production plays in Mrs. A’s
disease, the diagnosis of COPD is nearly definite.
4
Mrs. A is given a tiotropium inhaler, and she reports mild
improvement in her symptoms. A month later, a long-
acting β-agonist inhaler was added. This regimen pro-
duced better control of her symptoms. Four months
later, she arrives at the emergency department with
acute worsening of her symptoms at the time of an
upper respiratory tract infection. She is admitted with
an exacerbation of COPD.
REFERENCES
Aaron SD, Vandemheen KL, Fergusson D et al. Tiotropium in combination with
placebo, salmeterol, or fluticasone-salmeterol for treatment of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med.
2007;146(8):545–55.
Bach PB, Brown C, Gelfand SE, McCrory DC. Management of acute exacerba-
tions of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a summary and appraisal of
published evidence. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134:600–20.
Barker AF. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1383–93.
Bingham CO. An Overview of Angioedema. UpToDate, accessed 4/2008.
Bone RC, Pierce AK, Johnson RL Jr. Controlled oxygen administration in acute
respiratory failure in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a reappraisal.
Am J Med. 1978;65:896–902.
Calverley PM, Anderson JA, Celli B et al. Salmeterol and fluticasone propionate
and survival in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med.
2007;356(8):775–89.
Christopher KL, Wood RP 2nd, Eckert RC, Blager FB, Raney RA, Souhrada JF.
Vocal-cord dysfunction presenting as asthma. N Engl J Med.
1983;308:1566–70.
Corren J, Newman KB. Vocal cord dysfunction mimicking bronchial asthma.
Postgrad Med. 1992;92:153–6.
Mahler DA, Harver A, Lentine T, Scott JA, Beck K, Schwartzstein RM. Descrip-
tors of breathlessness in cardiorespiratory diseases. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med. 1996;154:1357–63.
NIH/NHLBI. Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma.
Bethesda, 1997:146.
Turcotte H, Langdeau JB, Bowie DM, Boulet LP. Are questionnaires on respira-
tory symptoms reliable predictors of airway hyperresponsiveness in athletes
and sedentary subjects? J Asthma. 2003;40:71–80.
WHO/NHLBI. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. 2001.
WHEEZING OR STRIDOR /  483
Consider asthma,
paradoxical vocal
cord movement,
CHF
Consider COPD, CHF,
bronchiectasis, tracheal
disease, goiter, benign
or malignant laryngeal
disease, vocal cord
pathology
Consider foreign
body aspiration,
anaphylaxis,
angioedema
Consider bronchitis,
epiglottitis,
retropharyngeal
abscess, pharyngitis
Are the symptoms
persistent or
episodic?
Episodic
Persistent
Are the symptoms
of wheezing or
stridor acute or
chronic?
Chronic
Acute
Are the symptoms
accompanied by
signs of infection?
No
Yes
CHF, congestive heart failure; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Diagnostic Approach: Wheezing and Stridor
This page intentionally left blank 
