1
Everywhere on earth people use home remedies. In some places, the 
older or traditional ways of healing have been passed down from parents to 
children for hundreds of years.
Many home remedies have great value. Others have less. And some may 
be risky or harmful. Home remedies, like modern medicines, must be used 
with caution.
It is often safer to treat very serious illnesses with modern
medicine—following the advice of a health worker if possible.
Try to do no harm.
Only use remedies if you are sure they are safe and 
know exactly how to use them.
CHAPTER
Home Cures
and Popular Beliefs
HOME CURES THAT HELP
For many sicknesses, time-tested home 
remedies work as well as modern medicines—
or even better. They are often cheaper. And 
in some cases they are safer.
For example, many of the herbal teas 
people use for home treatment of coughs 
and colds do more good and cause fewer 
problems than cough syrups and strong 
medicines some doctors prescribe.
Also, the ‘rice water’, teas, or sweetened 
drinks that many mothers give to babies with 
diarrhea are often safer and do more good 
than any modern medicine. What matters 
most is that a baby with diarrhea get plenty of 
liquids (see p. 151).
The Limitations
of Home Remedies
Some diseases are helped by home remedies. Others can be treated better 
with modern medicine. This is true for most serious infections. Sicknesses like 
pneumonia, tetanus, typhoid, tuberculosis, appendicitis, diseases caused by sexual 
contact, and fever after childbirth should be treated with modern medicines as soon 
as possible. For these diseases, do not lose time trying to treat them first with home 
remedies only.
It is sometimes hard to be sure which home remedies work well and which do 
not. More careful studies are needed. For this reason:
FOR COUGHS, COLDS, AND 
COMMON DIARRHEA, HERBAL TEAS 
ARE OFTEN BETTER, CHEAPER, AND 
SAFER THAN MODERN MEDICINES.
1
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
2
Old Ways and New
Some modern ways of meeting health needs work better than old ones. But at times 
the older, traditional ways are best. For example, traditional ways of caring for children 
or old people are often kinder and work better than some newer, less personal ways.
Not many years ago everyone thought that mother’s milk was the best food for a 
young baby. They were right! Then the big companies that make canned and artificial 
milk began to tell mothers that bottle feeding was better. This is not true, but many 
mothers believed them and started to bottle feed their babies. As a result, thousands 
of babies have suffered and died needlessly from infection or hunger. For the reasons 
breast is best, see p. 271.
Respect your people’s traditions and build on them.
For more ideas for building on local traditions, see Helping Health Workers 
Learn, Chapter 7.
BELIEFS THAT CAN MAKE PEOPLE WELL
Some home remedies have a direct effect on the body. Others seem to work only 
because people believe in them. The healing power of belief can be very strong.
For example, I once saw a man who 
suffered from a very bad headache. To 
cure him, a woman gave him a small 
piece of yam, or sweet potato. She 
told him it was a strong painkiller. He 
believed her—and the pain went away 
quickly.
It was his faith in her treatment, and 
not the yam itself, that made him feel 
better.
Many home remedies work in this 
way. They help largely because people 
have faith in them. For this reason, they 
are especially useful to cure illnesses that are partly in people’s minds, or 
those caused in part by a person’s beliefs, worry, or fears.
Included in this group of sicknesses are: bewitchment or hexing, unreasonable 
or hysterical fear, uncertain ‘aches and pains’ (especially in persons going through 
stressful times, such as teenage girls or older women), and anxiety or nervous worry. 
Also included are some cases of asthma, hiccups, indigestion, stomach ulcers, 
migraine headaches, and even warts.
For all of these problems, the manner or ‘touch’ of the healer can be very 
important. What it often comes down to is showing you care, helping the sick person 
believe he will get well, or simply helping him relax.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
3
Sometimes a person’s belief in a remedy can help with problems that have 
completely physical causes.
For example, Mexican villagers have the following home cures for poisonous 
snakebite:
1. to use ‘guaco’ leaves
2. to bite
  the snake
3. to apply tobacco
4. to apply the skin of
  a poisonous lizard
5. to smear the snake’s
  bile on the bite
In other lands people have their own snakebite remedies—often many different 
ones. As far as we know, none of these home remedies has any direct effect 
against snake poison. The person who says that a home remedy kept a snake’s 
poison from harming him at all was probably bitten by a non-poisonous snake!
Yet any of these home remedies may do some good if a person believes in it.  
If it makes him less afraid, his pulse will slow down, he will move and tremble less, 
and as a result, the poison will spread through his body more slowly. So there is 
less danger!
But the benefit of these home remedies for snakebite is limited. In spite of their 
common use, many people still become very ill or die. As far as we know:
For snakebite it is usually better to use modern treatment. Be prepared: obtain 
‘antivenoms’ or ‘serums’ for poisonous bites before you need them (see p. 105). 
Do not wait until it is too late.
No home cure for poisonous bites (whether from snakes, 
scorpions, spiders, or other poisonous animals) has much 
effect beyond that of the healing power of belief.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
4
BELIEFS THAT CAN MAKE PEOPLE SICK
The power of belief can help heal people. But it can also harm them. If a person 
believes strongly enough that something will hurt him, his own fear can make him sick. 
For example:
Once I was called to see a woman 
who had just had a miscarriage and 
was still bleeding a little. There was 
an orange tree near her house. So I 
suggested she drink a glass of orange 
juice. (Oranges have vitamin C which 
helps strengthen blood vessels.) She 
drank it—even though she was afraid 
it would harm her.
Her fear was so great that soon she 
became very ill. I examined her, but 
could find nothing physically wrong. 
I tried to comfort her, telling her she 
was not in danger. But she said she 
was going to die. At last I gave her an 
injection of distilled (completely pure) 
water. Distilled water has no medical 
effect. But since she had great faith in 
injections, she quickly got better.
Actually, the juice did not harm her. What harmed her was her belief that it would 
make her sick. And what made her well was her faith in injections!
In this same way, many persons go on believing false ideas about witchcraft, 
injections, diet, and many other things. Much needless suffering is the result.
Perhaps, in a way, I had helped this woman. But the more I thought about it, the more 
I realized I had also wronged her; I had led her to believe things that were not true.
I wanted to set this right. So a few days later, when she was completely well, I went 
to her home and apologized for what I had done. I tried to help her understand that not 
the orange juice, but her fear had made her so sick. And that not the injection of water, 
but her freedom from fear had helped her get well.
By understanding the truth about the orange, the injection, and the tricks of her own 
mind, perhaps this woman and her family will become freer from fear and better able 
to care for their health in the future. For health is closely related to understanding and 
freedom from fear.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
5
WITCHCRAFT—BLACK MAGIC—AND THE EVIL EYE
If a person believes strongly enough that someone has the power to harm him, 
he may actually become ill. Anyone who believes he is bewitched or has been given 
the evil eye is really the victim of his own fears (see Susto, p. 24).
A ‘witch’ has no power over 
other people, except for her ability 
to make them believe that she has. 
For this reason:
Many things do harm only because 
people believe they are harmful.
It is impossible to bewitch  
a person who does not believe  
in witchcraft.
If you have a
strange sickness:
do not blame
a witch,
do not go to a
magic center.
but ask for
medical advice.
Some people think that they 
are ‘bewitched’ when they have 
strange or frightening illnesses 
(such as tumors of the genitals or 
cirrhosis of the liver, see p. 328). 
Such sicknesses have nothing to do 
with witchcraft or black magic. Their 
causes are natural.
Do not waste your money at ‘magic centers’ that claim to cure witchcraft. 
And do not seek revenge against a witch, because it will not solve anything. If 
you are seriously ill, go for medical help.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
6
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON SOME FOLK BELIEFS 
AND HOME REMEDIES
These examples are from the mountains of Mexico, the area that I know best. 
Perhaps some of the beliefs of your people are similar. Think about ways to learn which 
beliefs in your area lead to better health and which do not.
When people think 
someone is bewitched, is 
it true that he will get well 
if his relatives harm or kill 
the witch?
FALSE! No one is ever 
helped by harming 
someone else.
Is it true that when the ‘soft 
spot’ on top of a baby’s 
head sinks inward this 
means the baby will die 
of diarrhea unless he gets 
special treatment?
This is often true. The ‘soft 
spot’ sinks because the 
baby has lost too much 
liquid (see p. 151). Unless 
he gets more liquid soon, he 
may die (see p. 152).
This is not true! But children 
may be born mentally slow, 
deaf, or deformed if the 
mother does not use iodized 
salt, if she takes certain 
medicines, or for other 
reasons (see p. 318).
Is it true that if the light 
of the eclipsing moon 
falls on a pregnant 
mother, her child will 
be born deformed or 
mentally slow?
Is it true that mothers 
should give birth in a 
darkened room?
It is true that soft light 
is easier on the eyes of 
both the mother and the 
newborn child. But there 
should be enough light for 
the midwife to see what 
she is doing.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
7
Is it true that a newborn 
baby should not be 
bathed until the cord 
falls off?
True! The stump of the 
cord should be kept 
dry until it falls off. But 
the baby can be gently 
cleaned with a clean, soft, 
damp cloth.
A mother should wash with 
warm water the day after 
giving birth. The custom 
of not bathing for weeks 
following childbirth can lead 
to infections.
TRUE! Breast milk is 
better food and also 
helps protect the baby 
against infection.
In the weeks following 
childbirth, women should 
not avoid any nutritious 
foods. Instead, they 
should eat plenty of fruit, 
vegetables, meat, milk, 
eggs, whole grains, and 
beans (see p. 276).
What foods should women 
avoid in the first few weeks 
after childbirth?
Is it true that traditional 
breastfeeding is better 
than ‘modern’ bottle 
feeding?
How many days after giving 
birth should a mother wait 
before she bathes?
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
8
Is it a good idea to 
bathe a sick person, 
or will it do him harm?
It is a good idea. Sick 
people should be bathed 
in warm water every day.
NO! All fruits and juices 
are helpful when one 
has a cold or fever. They 
do not cause congestion 
or harm of any kind.
NO! When a person has 
a high fever, take off all 
covers and clothing. Let 
the air reach his body. 
This will help the fever go 
down (see p. 76).
True. It helps. Willow 
bark has a natural 
medicine in it very 
much like aspirin.
Is it true that tea made 
from willow bark will 
help bring fever down 
and stop pain?
Is it true that when 
a person has a 
high fever, he 
should be wrapped 
up so that the air 
will not harm him?
Is it true that 
oranges, guavas, 
and other fruits are 
harmful when one 
has a cold or a 
fever?
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
9
SUNKEN FONTANEL OR SOFT SPOT
The fontanel is the soft spot on the top of a newborn 
baby’s head. It is where the bones of his skull have not 
formed completely. Normally it takes a year to a year 
and a half for the soft spot to close completely.
Mothers in different lands realize that when the soft 
spot sinks inward their babies are in danger. They have 
many beliefs to explain this. In Latin America mothers 
think the baby’s brains have slipped downward. They 
try to correct this by sucking on the soft spot, by 
pushing up on the roof of the mouth, or by holding the 
baby upside down and slapping his feet. This does not 
help because… A sunken soft spot is really caused 
by dehydration (see p. 151).
This means the child is losing more liquid than 
he is drinking. He is too dry—usually because he has 
diarrhea, or diarrhea with vomiting.
Treatment:
1. 		Give the child plenty of liquid: Rehydration Drink (see p. 152), breast milk, or 
boiled water.
2. 		If necessary, treat the causes of the diarrhea and vomiting (see p. 152 to 
161). For most diarrheas, medicine is not needed, and may do more harm 
than good.
DO NOT
DO THIS
DO THIS
OR DO THIS
(MAGIC CURES
WILL NOT HELP
EITHER)
.
Note: If the soft spot is swollen or bulges upward, this may be a sign of meningitis. 
Begin treatment at once (see p. 185), and get medical help.
TO CURE A SUNKEN SOFT SPOT.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
10
Not one of these many remedies works. If it did, the others would not be needed. 
When a sickness has just one popular cure, it is more likely to be a good one. For 
prevention and treatment of goiter use iodized salt (p. 130).
2. 	FOUL OR DISGUSTING REMEDIES ARE NOT LIKELY TO HELP­—AND ARE 
OFTEN HARMFUL.
For example:
WAYS TO TELL WHETHER A HOME REMEDY
WORKS OR NOT
Because a lot of people use a home cure does not necessarily mean it works well or 
is safe. It is often hard to know which remedies are helpful and which may be harmful. 
Careful study is needed to be sure. Here are four rules to help tell which remedies are 
least likely to work, or are dangerous. (Examples are from Mexican villages.)
1.	 THE MORE REMEDIES THERE ARE FOR ANY ONE ILLNESS, THE LESS LIKELY 
IT IS THAT ANY OF THEM WORKS.
For example: In rural Mexico there are many home remedies for goiter, none of 
which does any real good. Here are some of them:
1. to tie a crab
on the goiter
2. to rub the goiter with
the hand of a dead child
3. to smear the brains of a
vulture on the goiter
4. to smear human
feces on the goiter
DON’T
DON’T
DON’T
DON’T
DON’T
DON’T
1. the idea that leprosy can be cured
by a drink made of rotting snakes
2. the idea that syphilis can
be cured by eating a vulture
These two remedies do not help at all. The first one can cause dangerous infections. 
Belief in remedies like these sometimes causes delay in getting proper medical care.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
11
3. 	REMEDIES THAT USE ANIMAL OR HUMAN WASTE DO NO GOOD AND CAN 
CAUSE DANGEROUS INFECTIONS. NEVER USE THEM.
Examples:
1. Putting human feces around the
eye does not cure blurred vision
and can cause infections.
2. Smearing cow dung on the head
to fight ringworm can cause tetanus
and other dangerous infections.
DON’T!
DON’T!
1. for a nosebleed, using yesca 
(a bright red mushroom)  
2. for deafness, putting 
powdered rattlesnake’s 
rattle in the ear
3. for dog bite, drink tea made 
from the dog’s tail
6. to ‘bring out’ the rash of 
measles, making tea from 
kapok bark
5. to prevent diarrhea when a child 
is teething, putting a necklace of 
snake’s fangs around the baby’s 
neck
4. for scorpion sting, tying 
a scorpion against the stung 
finger
Also, the droppings of rabbits or other animals do not help heal burns. To use 
them is very dangerous. Cow dung, held in the hand, cannot help control seizures. 
Teas made from human, pig, or any other animal feces do not cure anything. They 
can make people sicker. Never put feces on the navel of a newborn baby. This can 
cause tetanus.
4. 	THE MORE A REMEDY RESEMBLES THE SICKNESS IT IS SAID TO CURE, THE 
MORE LIKELY ITS BENEFITS COME ONLY FROM THE POWER OF BELIEF.
The association between each of the following illnesses and its remedy is clear in 
these examples from Mexico:
These remedies, and many other similar ones, have no curative value in 
themselves. They may be of some benefit if people believe in them. But for serious 
problems, be sure their use does not delay more effective treatment.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
12
CORN SILK (the tassels or ‘silk’ from an ear of maize)
A tea made from corn silk makes a person pass 
more urine. This can help reduce swelling of the 
feet—especially in pregnant women (see p. 176 
and 248).
Boil a large handful of corn silk in water and 
drink 1 or 2 glasses. It is not dangerous.
GARLIC
A drink made from garlic may help get rid of pinworms.
Chop finely, or crush, 4 cloves of garlic and mix with 1 glass  
of liquid (water, juice, or milk).
Dosage: Drink 1 glass daily for 3 weeks.
To treat vaginal infections with garlic, see p. 241 and 242.
MEDICINAL PLANTS
Many plants have curative powers. Some of the best modern medicines are made 
from wild herbs.
Nevertheless, not all ‘curative herbs’ people use have medical value... and those 
that have are sometimes used the wrong way. Try to learn about the herbs in your area 
and find out which ones are worthwhile.
CAUTION: Some medicinal herbs are very poisonous if taken in more 
than the recommended dose. For this reason it is often safer to use 
modern medicine, since the dosage is easier to control.
Here are a few examples of plants that can be useful if used correctly:
ANGEL’S TRUMPET (Datura arborea)
The leaves of this and certain other members of the 
nightshade family contain a drug that helps to calm 
intestinal cramps, stomach-aches, and even gallbladder 
pain.
Grind up 1 or 2 leaves of Angel’s Trumpet and soak 
them for a day in 7 tablespoons (100 ml.) of water.
Dosage: Between 10 and 15 drops every 4 hours (adults only).
WARNING: Angel’s Trumpet is very poisonous if you take more 
than the recommended dose. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
13
CARDON CACTUS (Pachycerius pectin-aboriginum)
Cactus juice can be used to clean wounds when there is no 
boiled water and no way to get any. Cardon cactus also helps stop 
a wound from bleeding, because the juice makes the cut blood 
vessels squeeze shut.
Cut a piece of the cactus 
with a clean knife and press it 
firmly against the wound.
When the bleeding is under 
control, tie a piece of the 
cactus to the wound with a 
strip of cloth.
After 2 or 3 hours, take 
off the cactus and clean the wound with boiled water and soap. There are more 
instructions on how to care for wounds and control bleeding on pages 82 to 87.
ALOE VERA (Sabila)
Aloe vera can be used to treat minor burns and wounds. The thick, slimy juice 
inside the plant calms pain and itching, aids healing, and 
helps prevent infection. Cut off a piece of the plant, peel 
back the outer layer, and apply the fleshy leaf or juice directly 
to the burn or wound.
Aloe can also help treat stomach ulcers and gastritis. 
Chop the spongy leaves into small pieces, soak them in 
water overnight, and then drink one glass of the slimy, bitter 
liquid every 2 hours.
PAPAYA
Ripe papayas are rich in vitamins and also aid digestion. 
Eating them is especially helpful for weak or old people 
who complain of upset stomach when they eat meat, 
chicken, or eggs. Papaya makes these foods easier to 
digest.
Papaya can also help get rid of intestinal worms, 
although modern medicines work better. Collect 3 or 4 
teaspoons (15-20 ml.) of the ‘milk’ that comes out when 
the green fruit or trunk of the tree is cut. Mix this with an 
equal amount of sugar or honey and stir it into a cup of 
hot water. If possible, drink along with a laxative.
Even better, dry and crush to a powder the papaya seeds. Take 3 teaspoons 
mixed with 1 glass water or some honey 3 times a day for 7 days.
Papayas can also be used for treating pressure sores. The fruit contains 
chemicals that help soften and make dead flesh easier to remove. First clean and 
wash out a pressure sore that has dead flesh in it. Then soak a sterile cloth or gauze 
with ‘milk’ from the trunk or green fruit of a papaya plant and pack this into the sore, 
Repeat cleaning and repacking 3 times a day.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
14
HOMEMADE CASTS—
FOR KEEPING BROKEN BONES IN PLACE
In Mexico several different plants such as tepeguaje (a tree of the bean family) and 
solda con solda (a huge, tree-climbing arum lily) are used to make casts. However, any 
plant will do if a syrup can be made from it that will dry hard and firm and will not irritate 
the skin. In India, traditional bone-setters make casts using a mixture of egg whites 
and herbs instead of a syrup made from plant juices. But the method is similar. Try out 
different plants in your area.
For a cast using tepeguaje: Put 1 kilogram of the bark 
into 5 liters of water and boil until only 2 liters are left. Strain 
and boil until a thick syrup is formed. Dip strips of flannel or 
clean sheet in the syrup and carefully use as follows.
Make sure the bones are in a good position (p. 98).
Do not put the cast directly against the skin.
Wrap the arm or leg in a soft cloth.
Then follow with a layer of cotton or wild kapok.
Finally, put on the wet cloth strips so that they form a 
cast that is firm but not too tight.
Most doctors recommend that the cast cover 
the joint above and the joint below the break, to 
keep the broken bones from moving.
This would mean that, for a broken wrist, the 
cast should cover almost the whole arm, like this:
Leave the finger tips uncovered so that you 
can see if they keep a good color.
However, traditional bone-setters in China 
and Latin America use a short cast on a simple 
break of the arm saying that a little movement of 
the bone-ends speeds healing. Recent scientific 
studies have proven this to be true.
A temporary leg or arm splint can be made of 
cardboard, folded paper, or the thick curved stem 
of dried banana leaf, or palm leaf.
CAUTION: Even if the cast is not very tight when you put it on, the broken limb may 
swell up later. If the person complains that the cast is too tight, or if his fingers or toes 
become cold, white, or blue, take the cast off and put on a new, looser one.
Never put on a cast over a cut or a wound.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
15
ENEMAS, LAXATIVES, AND PURGES:
WHEN TO USE THEM AND WHEN NOT TO
Many people give enemas and take laxatives far 
too often. The ‘urge to purge’ is worldwide.
Enemas and purges are very popular home 
cures. And they are often very harmful. Many 
people believe fever and diarrhea can be ‘washed 
out’ by giving an enema (running water into the gut 
through the anus) or by using a purge, or strong 
laxative. Unfortunately, such efforts to clean or 
purge the sick body often cause more injury to the 
already damaged gut.
Rarely do enemas or laxatives do any good at all. 
Often they are dangerous—especially strong laxatives.
CASES IN WHICH IT IS DANGEROUS TO USE ENEMAS OR LAXATIVES
Never use an enema or laxative if a person has a severe stomach-ache or any 
other sign of appendicitis or ‘acute abdomen’ (see p. 93), even if he passes days 
without a bowel movement.
Never give an enema or laxative to a person with a bullet wound or other injury 
to the gut.
Never give a strong laxative to a weak or sick person. It will weaken him more.
Never give an enema or purge to a baby less than 2 years old.
Never give a laxative or purge to a child with high fever, vomiting, diarrhea or 
signs of dehydration (see p. 151). It can increase dehydration and kill the child.
Do not make a habit of using laxatives often (see Constipation, p. 126).
THE CORRECT USES OF ENEMAS
1. Simple enemas can help relieve constipation (dry, hard, difficult stools).  
Use warm water only. 
2. When a person with severe vomiting is dehydrated, you can try replacing water 
by giving an enema of Rehydration Drink very slowly (see p. 152).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
16
CORRECT USES OF LAXATIVES AND PURGES
Laxatives are like purges but weaker. All the products listed above are laxatives 
when taken in small doses and purges when taken in large doses. Laxatives soften and 
hurry the bowel movement; purges cause diarrhea.
Purges: The only time a person should use a strong dose of a purge is when he has 
taken a poison and must clean it out quickly (see p. 103). At any other time a purge is 
harmful.
Laxatives: One can use milk of magnesia or other magnesium salts in small doses, 
as laxatives, in some cases of constipation. People with hemorrhoids (piles, p. 175) 
who have constipation can take mineral oil but this only makes their stools slippery, not 
soft. The dose for mineral oil is 3 to 6 teaspoons at bedtime (never with a meal because 
the oil will rob the body of important vitamins in the food). This is not the best way.
Suppositories, or bullet-shaped pills that can be pushed up the rectum, can also be 
used to relieve constipation or piles (see pages 175, 382, and 391).
A BETTER WAY
Foods with fiber. The healthiest and most gentle way to have softer, more frequent 
stools is to drink a lot of water and to eat more foods with lots of natural fiber, or 
‘roughage’ like cassava, yam, or bran (wheat husks) and other whole grain cereals 
(see p. 126). Eating plenty of fruits and vegetables also helps.
People who traditionally eat lots of food with natural fiber suffer much less from piles, 
constipation, and cancer of the gut than do people who eat a lot of refined ‘modern’ 
foods. For better bowel habits, avoid refined foods and eat foods prepared from 
unpolished or unrefined grains.
Purges and laxatives that are often used
CASTOR OIL
SENNA LEAF
CASCARA (cascara sagrada)
MAGNESIUM HYDROXIDE
MILK OF MAGNESIA	
EPSOM SALTS (magnesium sulfate)
	
(see p. 382
MINERAL OIL
	
(see p. 382)
These are irritating purges that often do 
more harm than good. It is better not to 
use them.
These are salt purges. Use them only in 
low doses, as laxative for constipation.
Do not use them often and never when 
there is pain in the belly.
This is sometimes used for constipation in 
persons with piles...but it is like passing 
greased rocks. Not recommended.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
)
17
WHAT CAUSES SICKNESS?
Persons from different countries or backgrounds have different ways to explain 
what causes sickness.
A baby gets diarrhea. But why?
People in small villages may 
say it is because the parents did 
something wrong, or perhaps 
because they made a god or spirit 
angry.
A doctor may say it is because 
the child has an infection.
A public health officer may say 
it is because the villagers do not 
have a good water system or use 
latrines.
A social reformer may say the unhealthy conditions that lead to frequent 
childhood diarrhea are caused by an unfair distribution of land and wealth.
A teacher may place the blame on lack of education.
People see the cause of sickness in terms of their own experience and point of 
view. Who then is right about the cause? Possibly everyone is right, or partly right. 
This is because…
Each of the causes suggested above may be a part 
of the reason why a baby gets diarrhea.
To prevent and treat sickness successfully, it helps 
to have as full an understanding as possible about the 
common sicknesses in your area and the combination 
of things that causes them.
In this book, different sicknesses are discussed 
mostly according to the systems and terms of modern 
or scientific medicine.
To make good use of this book, and safe use of 
the medicines it recommends, you will need some 
understanding of sicknesses and their causes 
according to medical science. Reading this chapter 
may help.
Sickness usually results from a combination of causes.
“Why my child?”
CHAPTER
2
Sicknesses that
Are Often Confused
18
DIFFERENT KINDS OF SICKNESSES AND THEIR CAUSES
When considering how to prevent or treat different sicknesses, it helps to think of 
them in two groups: infectious and non-infectious.
Infectious diseases are those that spread from one person to another. Healthy 
persons must be protected from people with these sicknesses.
Non-Infectious diseases do not spread from person to person. They have other 
causes. Therefore, it is important to know which sicknesses are infectious and which 
are not.
Non-infectious Diseases
Non-infectious diseases have many different causes. But they are never caused by 
germs, bacteria, or other living organisms that attack the body. They never spread from 
one person to another. It is important to realize that antibiotics, or medicines that fight 
germs (see p. 55), do not help cure non-infectious diseases.
Remember: Antibiotics are of no use for non-infectious diseases.
EXAMPLES OF NON-INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Problems caused by something
that wears out or goes wrong
within the body:
rheumatism
heart attack
epileptic seizures
stroke
migraine headaches
cataract
cancer
Problems caused by something 
from outside that harms or 
troubles the body:
allergies
asthma
poisons
snakebite
cough from smoking
stomach ulcer
alcoholism
Problems caused by a lack of 
something the body needs:
malnutrition
anemia
pellagra
night blindness and
xerophthalmia
goiter and cretinism
cirrhosis of the liver
(part of the cause)
Problems people are born with:
Problems that begin in the mind
(mental illnesses):
fear that something is harmful when it is not
(paranoia)
nervous worry (anxiety)
belief in hexes (witchcraft)
uncontrolled fear (hysteria)
harelip 
crossed or wall-eyes 
(squint)
other deformities
epilepsy (some kinds) 
mental slowness
birthmarks
Infectious Diseases
Infectious diseases are caused by bacteria and other organisms (living things) that 
harm the body. They are spread in many ways. Here are some of the most important 
kinds of organisms that cause infections and examples of sicknesses they cause:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
19
Bacteria, like many of the organisms that cause infections, are 
so small you cannot see them without a microscope—an instrument 
that makes tiny things look bigger. Viruses are even smaller than 
bacteria.
Antibiotics (penicillin, tetracycline, etc.) are medicines that 
help cure certain illnesses caused by bacteria. Antibiotics have 
no effect on illnesses caused by most viruses, such as colds, flu, mumps, 
chickenpox, etc. Do not treat virus infections with antibiotics. They will not help 
and may be harmful (see antibiotics, p. 55).
EXAMPLES OF INFECTIOUS DISEASES
	
colds, flu, measles,	
from someone who is	
aspirin and other 
	
mumps, chickenpox,	
sick, through the	
painkillers  
	
infantile paralysis,	
air, by coughing.	
(Medicines like  
	
virus diarrhea	
flies, etc.	
antibiotics do not 
	
	
	
fight viruses effectively)
	
rabies	
animal bites	
Vaccinations prevent
	
warts	
touch	
some virus infections.
	
HIV	
body fluids of someone 	
Antiretroviral
	
	
infected get inside	
medicines fight HIV. 
	
	
another person´s  
	
	
body
	
ringworm	
by touch or from	
sulfur and vinegar 
	
athlete’s foot	
clothing	
ointments: undecylenic, 
	
jock itch	
	
benzoic, salicylic acid 
	
	
	
griseofulvin
	
In the gut:	
	
 
	
worms	
feces-to-mouth	
different specific 
	
amebas (dysentery)	
lack of cleanliness	
medicines
	
In the blood:	
	
a combination of 
	
malaria	
mosquito bite	
malaria medicines
	
lice 
        external parasites	
fleas	
by contact with	
permethrin, 
        (harmful animals	
bedbugs	
infected persons	
keeping very clean 
        living on the body)	
scabies	
or their clothes	
Organism that causes	
Name of the sickness	
How it is spread or	
Principal medicine
the sickness	
	
enters the body
	
tuberculosis	
through the air 
	
	
(coughing)
	
tetanus	
dirty wounds
	
some diarrhea	
dirty fingers, water, flies
bacteria	
pneumonia	
through the air 
(microbes or germs)	
(some kinds)	
(coughing)
	
gonorrhea,	
sexual contact 
	
chlamydia, and 
	
syphillis
	
earache	
with a cold
	
infected wounds	
contact with dirty things
	
sores with pus	
direct contact (by touch)
different
antibiotics
for different
bacterial
infections
virus
(germs smaller 
than bacteria)
fungus
internal parasites  
(harmful animals 
living in the body)
}
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
20
SICKNESSES THAT ARE HARD TO TELL APART
Sometimes diseases that have different causes and require different treatment result 
in problems that look very much alike. For example:
1. 	A child who slowly becomes thin and 
wasted, while his belly gets more and more 
swollen, could have any (or several) of the 
following problems:
• malnutrition (see p. 112)
• a lot of roundworms, p. 140, (usually together 
with malnutrition)
• advanced tuberculosis (p. 179)
• a long-term severe urinary infection (p. 234)
• any of several problems of the liver or spleen
• leukemia (cancer of the blood)
2. An older person with a big, open, slowly 
growing sore on the ankle could have:
• bad circulation that results from varicose 
veins or other causes (p. 213)
• diabetes (p. 127)
• infection of the bone (osteomyelitis)
• leprosy (p. 191)
• tuberculosis of the skin (p. 212)
• advanced syphilis (p. 237)
The medical treatment for each of these diseases is different, so to treat them 
correctly it is important to tell them apart.
Many illnesses at first seem very similar. But if you ask the right questions and know 
what to look for, you can often learn information and see certain signs that will help tell 
you what illness a person has.
This book describes the typical history and signs for many illnesses. But be careful! 
Diseases do not always show the signs described for them—or the signs may be 
confusing. For difficult cases, the help of a skilled health worker or doctor is often 
needed. Sometimes special tests or analyses are necessary.
Work within your limits!
In using this book, remember it is easy to make mistakes.
Never pretend you know something you do not.
If you are not fairly sure what an illness is and how to treat it, 
or if the illness is very serious—get medical help.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
21
SICKNESSES THAT ARE OFTEN CONFUSED
OR GIVEN THE SAME NAME
Many of the common names people use for their sicknesses were first used 
long before anyone knew about germs or bacteria or the medicines that fight them. 
Different diseases that caused more or less similar problems-such as ‘high fever’ or 
‘pain in the side’—were often given a single name. In many parts of the world, these 
common names are still used. City-trained doctors often neither know nor use these 
names. For this reason, people sometimes think they apply to ‘sicknesses doctors 
do not treat’. So they treat these home sicknesses with herbs or home remedies.
Actually, most of these home sicknesses or ‘folk diseases’ are the same ones 
known to medical science. Only the names are different.
For many sicknesses, home remedies work well. But for some sicknesses, 
treatment with modern medicine works much better and may be life‑saving. This 
is especially true for dangerous infections like pneumonia, typhoid, tuberculosis, or 
infections after giving birth.
To know which sicknesses definitely require modern medicines and to decide 
what medicine to use, it is important that you try to find out what the disease is in 
the terms used by trained health workers and in this book.
If you cannot find the sickness you are looking for in 
this book, look for it under a different name or in the 
chapter that covers the same sort of problem.
Use the list of CONTENTS and the INDEX.
If you are unsure what the sickness is—especially if it seems serious—try to get 
medical help.
The rest of this chapter gives examples of common or traditional names people 
use for various sicknesses. Often a single name is given to diseases that are 
different according to medical science.
Examples cannot be given for each country or area where this book may be 
used. Therefore, I have kept those from the Spanish edition, with names used by 
villagers in western Mexico. They will not be the same names you use. However, 
people in many parts of the world see and speak of their illnesses in a similar way. 
So the examples may help you think about how people name diseases in your area.
Can you think of a name your people use for the following ‘folk diseases’? If you 
can, write it in after the Spanish name, where it says,
	
	
	
Name in Your Area:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
22
EXAMPLES OF LOCAL NAMES FOR SICKNESSES
Spanish Name: EMPACHO (STOPPED-UP GUT) Name in Your Area:
In medical terms empacho 
(impaction) means that the gut is 
stopped up or obstructed (see 
p. 94). But in Mexican 
villages any illness causing 
stomach‑ache or diarrhea may 
be called empacho. It is said 
that a ball of hair or something 
else blocks a part of the gut. 
People put the blame on witches 
or evil spirits, and treat with 
magic cures and cupping (see 
picture). Sometimes folk healers pretend to take a ball of hair and thorns out of the gut 
by sucking on the belly.
Different illnesses that cause stomach pain or discomfort and are sometimes called 
empacho are:
•	 diarrhea or dysentery with cramps (p. 153)
•	 worms (p. 140)
•	 swollen stomach due to malnutrition (p. 112)
•	 indigestion or stomach ulcer (p. 128)
•	 and rarely, true gut obstruction or appendicitis (p. 94)
Most of these problems are not helped much by magic cures or cupping. To treat 
empacho, try to identify and treat the sickness that causes it.
Spanish Name: DOLOR DE IJAR (SIDE PAINS) Name in Your Area:
This name is used for any pain women get in 
one side of their belly. Often the pain goes around 
to the mid or lower back. Possible causes of this 
kind of pain include:
•	 an infection of the urinary system (the 
kidneys, the bladder, or the tubes that join 
them, see p. 234)
•	 cramps or gas pains (see diarrhea, p. 153)
•	 menstrual pains (see p. 245)
•	 appendicitis (see p. 94)
•	 an infection, cyst, or tumor in the womb 
or ovaries (p. 243) or an out-of-place 
pregnancy (see p. 280)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
23
Spanish Name: LA CONGESTIÓN (CONGESTION) Name in Your Area:
Any sudden upset or illness that causes great distress is called la congestión by 
Mexican villagers. People speak of congestión of:
It is said that la congestión strikes persons who break ‘the diet’ (see p. 123), 
by eating foods that are forbidden or taboo after childbirth, while taking a medicine, 
or when they have a cold or cough. Although these foods usually cause no harm 
and are sometimes just what their bodies need, many people will not touch them 
because they are so afraid of getting la congestión.
Different illnesses that are sometimes called la congestión are:
•	 Food poisoning, from eating spoiled food: causes sudden vomiting followed 
by diarrhea, cramps, and weakness (see p. 135).
•	 A severe allergic reaction, in allergic persons after they eat certain foods 
(shellfish, chocolate, etc,), take certain medicines, or are injected with 
penicillin. May cause vomiting, diarrhea, cold sweat, breathing trouble, itchy 
rash, and severe distress (see p. 166).
•	 Any sudden upset of the stomach or gut: see diarrhea (p. 153), vomiting  
(p. 161), and acute abdomen (p. 93).
•	 Sudden or severe difficulty breathing: caused by asthma (p. 167), pneumonia 
(p. 171), or something stuck in the throat (p. 79).
•	 Illnesses that cause seizures (fits) or paralysis: see seizures (p. 178), tetanus 
(p. 182), meningitis (p. 185), polio (p. 314), and stroke (p. 327).
•	 Heart attacks: mostly in older persons (p. 325).
Spanish Name: LATIDO (PULSING) Name in Your Area:
Latido is a name used in Latin America for a pulsing or ‘jumping’ in the pit of the 
stomach. It is really the pulse of the aorta or big blood vessel coming from the heart. 
This pulse can be seen and felt on a person who is very thin and hungry. Latido is 
often a sign of malnutrition (p. 112)—or hunger! Eating enough good food is the only 
real treatment (see p. 110 and 111).
the head,
the chest,
the stomach,
or the whole body.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
24
Spanish Name: SUSTO (HYSTERIA, FRIGHT) Name in Your Area:
According to Mexican villagers, susto is caused by a sudden fright a person has 
had, or by witchcraft, black magic, or evil spirits. A person with susto is very nervous 
and afraid. He may shake, behave strangely, not be able to sleep, lose weight, or  
even die.
Possible medical explanations for susto:
1. In many people, susto is a state of fear or hysteria, perhaps caused by the 
‘power of belief’ (see p. 4). For example, a woman who is afraid someone will hex 
her becomes nervous and does not eat or sleep well. She begins to grow weak and 
lose weight. She takes this as a sign she has been hexed, so she becomes still more 
nervous and frightened. Her susto gets worse and worse.
2. In babies or small children, susto is usually very different. Bad dreams may 
cause a child to cry out in his sleep or wake up frightened. High fevers from any 
illness can cause very strange speech and behavior (delirium). A child that often looks 
and acts worried may be malnourished (p. 112). Sometimes early signs of tetanus  
(p. 182) or meningitis (p. 185) are also called susto.
Treatment:
When the susto is caused by a specific illness, treat the illness. Help the person 
understand its cause. Ask for medical advice, if needed.
When the susto is caused by fright, try to comfort the person and help him 
understand that his fear itself is the cause of his problem. Magic cures and home 
remedies sometimes help.
If the frightened person is breathing very hard and fast, his body may be getting 
too much air—which may be part of the problem:
EXTREME FRIGHT OR HYSTERIA WITH FAST HEAVY BREATHING 
(HYPERVENTILATION)
Signs:
•	 person very frightened
•	 breathing fast and deep
•	 fast, pounding heartbeat
•	 numbness or tingling of face, 
hands, or feet
•	 muscle cramps
Treatment:
♦ Keep the person as quiet as possible.
♦ Have her put her face in a paper bag 
and breathe slowly. She should continue 
breathing the same air for 2 or 3 minutes. 
This will usually calm her down.
♦ Explain to her that the problem is not dangerous and 
she will soon be all right.
BEFORE
AFTER
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
25
MISUNDERSTANDINGS DUE TO CONFUSION OF NAMES
This page shows 2 examples of misunderstandings that can result when certain 
names like ‘cancer’ and ‘leprosy’ mean one thing to medical workers and something 
else to villagers. In talking with health workers-and in using this book:
Spanish Name: CÁNCER (CANCER) Name in Your Area:
Mexican villagers use the word cáncer for any severe infection of the skin, 
especially badly infected wounds (p. 88) or gangrene (p. 213).
In modern medical language, cancer is not an infection, but an abnormal growth 
or lump in any part of the body. Common types of cancer that you should watch out 
for are:
Any hard, painless, slowly growing lump in any part of your body may be cancer. 
Cancer is often dangerous and may need surgery.
At the first suspicion of cancer seek medical help.
Spanish Name: LEPRA (LEPROSY) Name in Your Area:
Mexican villagers call any open spreading sore lepra. 
This leads to confusion, because medical workers use this 
term only for true leprosy (Hansen’s disease, p. 191). Sores 
commonly called lepra are:
•	 impetigo and other skin infections (p. 202)
•	 sores that come from insect bites or scabies (p. 199)
•	 chronic sores or skin ulcers such as those caused by 
poor circulation (p. 213)
•	 skin cancer (p. 211)
•	 less commonly, leprosy (p. 191) or tuberculosis of 
the skin (p. 212)
This child has impetigo,  
not leprosy.
Avoid misunderstanding­—go by the signs and history 
of a person’s sickness, not the name people give it!
cancer of the skin 
(p. 211)
breast cancer 
(p. 279)
cancer of the womb or ovaries 
(p. 280)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
26
CONFUSION BETWEEN DIFFERENT ILLNESSES 
THAT CAUSE FEVER
Spanish Name: LA FIEBRE (THE FEVER) Name in Your Area:
Correctly speaking, a fever is a body 
temperature higher than normal. But in Latin 
America, a number of serious illnesses that cause 
high temperatures are all called la fiebre—or ‘the 
fever’.
To prevent or treat these diseases successfully, it 
is important to know how to tell one from another.
Here are some of the important acute illnesses in which fever is an outstanding sign. 
The drawings show the fever pattern (rise and fall of temperature) that is typical for 
each disease.
Malaria: (see p. 186)
Begins with weakness, chills and 
fever. Fever may come and go for 
a few days, with shivering (chills) 
as the temperature rises, and 
sweating as it falls. Then, fever may 
come for a few hours every second 
or third day. On other days, the 
person may feel more or less well.
Typhoid: (see p. 188)
Begins like a cold. Temperature 
goes up a little more each day. 
Pulse relatively slow. Sometimes 
diarrhea and dehydration. 
Trembling or delirium (mind 
wanders). Person very ill.
Typhus: (see p. 190)
Similar to typhoid. Rash similar to 
that of measles, with tiny bruises.
Hepatitis: (see p. 172)
Person loses appetite. Does not 
wish to eat or smoke. Wants to 
vomit (nausea). Eyes and skin 
turn yellow; urine orange or 
brown; stools whitish. Sometimes 
liver becomes large, tender. Mild 
fever. Person very weak.
TYPHOID —	
	
	
The fever goes up
TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN	
a little each day.
HEPATITIS—	
	
	
Usually the fever
TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN	
is mild.
MALARIA — TYPICAL	
The solid line shows the rise
FEVER PATTERN	
and fall of temperature.
Days of Illness
Days of Illness
Days of Illness
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
27
Pneumonia: (see p. 171)
Fast, shallow breathing. 
Temperature rises quickly. 
Cough with green, yellow, or 
bloody mucus. May be pain in 
chest. Person very ill.
Rheumatic fever: (see p. 310)
Most common in children 
and teenagers. Pain in 
joints. High fever. Often 
comes after a sore throat. 
May be pain in the chest 
with shortness of breath. Or 
uncontrolled movements of 
arms and legs.
Brucellosis (undulant fever, 
Malta fever): (see p. 188)
Begins slowly with 
tiredness, headache, 
and pains in the bones. 
Fever and sweating most 
common at night. Fever 
disappears for a few days 
only to come back again. 
This may go on for months 
or years.
Childbirth fever: (see p. 276)
Begins a day or more after 
giving birth. Starts with a slight 
fever, which often rises later. 
Foul-smelling vaginal discharge. 
Pain and sometimes bleeding.
All of these illnesses can be dangerous. In addition to those shown here, there 
are many other diseases that may cause similar signs and fever. For example, fevers 
that last for more than 1 month, or night sweats, may be caused by HIV infection 
(see p. 399). When possible, seek medical help.
PNEUMONIA — TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN
RHEUMATIC FEVER-TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN
Days of Illness
Days of Illness
viral infection
First: sudden fever 
with sore throat
10 or 15 days later fever 
begins — with joint pain 
and other signs.
BRUCELLOSIS —	
     Fever comes in waves. Rises in
TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN     the afternoon and falls at night.
Weeks of Illness
CHILBIRTH FEVER — TYPICAL FEVER PATTERN
person gets worse 
and fever rises
usually begins with 
low fever
Days following childbirth
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
29
To find out the needs of a sick person, first you must ask important questions and 
then examine him carefully. You should look for signs and symptoms that help you tell 
how ill the person is and what kind of sickness he may have.
Always examine the person where there is good light, preferably in the sunlight — 
never in a dark room.
There are certain basic things to ask and to look for in anyone who is sick. These 
include things the sick person feels or reports (symptoms), as well as things you 
notice on examining him (signs). These signs can be especially important in babies 
and persons unable to talk. In this book the word ‘signs’ is used for both symptoms 
and signs.
When you examine a sick person, write down your findings and keep them 
for the health worker in case he is needed (see p. 44).
QUESTIONS
Start by asking the person about her 
sickness. Be sure to ask the following:
What bothers you most right now?
What makes you feel better or 
worse?
How and when did your sickness 
begin?
Have you had this same trouble 
before, or has anyone else in 
your family or neighborhood 
had it?
Continue with other questions 
in order to learn the details of the illness.
For example, if the sick person has a pain, ask her:
Where does it hurt? (Ask her to point to the exact place with one finger.)
Does it hurt all the time, or off and on?
What is the pain like? (sharp? dull? burning?)
Can you sleep with the pain?
If the sick person is a baby who still does not talk, look for signs of pain. Notice 
his movements and how he cries. (For example, a child with an earache sometimes 
rubs the side of his head or pulls at his ear.)
CHAPTER
3
How to Examine
a Sick Person
30
GENERAL CONDITION OF HEALTH
Before touching the sick person, look at him carefully. Observe how ill or weak he 
looks, the way he moves, how he breathes, and how clear his mind seems. Look for 
signs of dehydration (see p. 151) and of shock (p. 77).
Notice whether the person looks well nourished or poorly nourished. Has he been 
losing weight? When a person has lost weight slowly over a long period of time, he may 
have a chronic illness (one that lasts a long time).
Also note the color of the skin and eyes. These sometimes change when a person 
is sick. (Dark skin can hide color changes. So look at parts of the body where the skin 
is pale, such as palms of the hands or soles of the feet, the fingernails, or the insides of 
the lips and eyelids.)
•	 Paleness, especially of the lips and inside the eyelids, is a sign of anemia 
(p. 124). Skin may also go lighter as a result of tuberculosis (p. 179), or 
kwashiorkor (p. 113).
•	 Darkening of the skin may be a sign of starvation (see p. 112).
•	 Bluish skin, especially blueness or darkness of the lips and fingernails, may 
mean serious problems with breathing (p. 79, 167, and 313) or with the heart (p. 
325). Blue-gray color in an unconscious child may be a sign of cerebral malaria 
(p. 186).
•	 A gray-white coloring, with cool moist skin, often means a person is in shock 
(p. 77).
•	 Yellow color (jaundice) of the skin and eyes may result from disease in the liver 
(hepatitis, p. 172, cirrhosis, p. 328, or amebic abscess, p. 145) or gallbladder 
(p. 329). It may also occur in newborn babies (p. 274), and in children born with 
sickle cell disease (p. 321).
Look also at the skin when a light is shining across it from one side. This can show 
the earliest sign of measles rash on the face of a feverish child (p. 311).
TEMPERATURE
It is often wise to take a sick person’s temperature, even if he 
does not seem to have a fever. If the person is very sick, take the 
temperature at least 4 times each day and write it down. 
If there is no thermometer, you can get an idea of the 
temperature by putting the back of one hand on the 
sick person’s forehead and the other on your own or 
that of another healthy person. If the sick person has 
a fever, you should feel the difference.
It is important to find out when and how the fever comes, how long it lasts, and how 
it goes away. This may help you identify the disease. Not every fever is malaria, though 
in some countries it is often treated as such. Remember other possible causes. For 
example:
•	 Common cold, and other virus infections (p. 163). The fever is usually mild.
•	 Typhoid causes a fever that goes on rising for 5 days. Malaria medicine does not 
help.
•	 Tuberculosis sometimes causes a mild fever in the afternoon. At night the person 
often sweats, and the fever goes down.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
31
How to Use a Thermometer
Every family should have a thermometer. Take the temperature of a sick person 
4 times a day and always write it down.
How to read the thermometer (using one marked in degrees centigrade—°C):
How to take the temperature:
1.	 Clean the thermometer well with 
soap and water or alcohol. Shake 
it hard, with a snap of the wrist, 
until it reads less than 36 degrees.
2.	 Put the thermometer…
Turn the thermometer until you 
can see the silver line.
High Fever
Fever
Normal
This thermometer 
marks 40 degrees C.
The point where the silver line 
stops marks the temperature.
under the tongue 
(keeping the 
mouth shut)
in the armpit if there 
is danger of biting 
the thermometer
carefully, in the anus  
of a small child  
(wet or grease it first)
or
or
3.	 Leave it there for 3 or 4 minutes.
4.	 Read it. (An armpit temperature will read a little lower than a mouth reading; 
in the anus it will read a little higher.)
5.	 Wash the thermometer well with soap and water.
Note: in newborn babies a temperature that is unusually high or unsually low 
(below 36°) may mean a serious infection (see p. 275).
♦	 To learn about other fever patterns, see p. 26 to 27.
♦	 To learn what to do for a fever, see p. 75.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
32
BREATHING (RESPIRATION)
Pay special attention to the way the sick person breathes—the depth (deep or 
shallow), rate (how often breaths are taken), and difficulty. Notice if both sides of the 
chest move equally when she breathes.
If you have a watch or simple timer, count the number of breaths per minute (when 
the person is quiet). Between 12 and 20 breaths per minute is normal for adults and 
older children. Up to 30 breaths a minute is normal for younger children, and 40 for 
babies. People with a high fever or serious respiratory illness breathe more quickly than 
normal. For example, more than 30 shallow breaths a minute in an adult usually means 
pneumonia, as does 60 breaths a minute for a newborn baby.
Listen carefully to the sound of the breaths. For example:
•	 A whistle or wheeze and difficulty breathing out can mean asthma (see p. 167).
•	 A gurgling or snoring noise and difficult breathing in an unconscious person 
may mean the tongue, mucus (slime or pus), or something else is stuck in the 
throat and does not let enough air get through.
Look for ‘sucking in’ of the skin between ribs and at the angle of the neck (behind 
the collar bone) when the person breathes in. This means air has trouble getting 
through. Consider the possibility of something stuck in the throat (p. 79), pneumonia  
(p. 171), asthma (p. 167), or bronchitis (mild sucking in, see p. 170).
If the person has a cough, ask if it keeps her from sleeping. Find out if she coughs 
up mucus, how much, its color, and if there is blood in it.
Pay attention to the strength, the rate, and the regularity of the pulse. If you have a 
watch or timer, count the pulses per minute.
To take the person’s pulse, 
put your fingers on the wrist 
as shown. (Do not use your 
thumb to feel for the pulse.)
If you cannot find the pulse in 
the wrist, feel for it in the neck 
beside the voicebox.
Or put your ear directly or 
the chest and listen for the 
heartbeat (or use a stethoscope 
if you have one).
	
	
	
NORMAL PULSE FOR PEOPLE AT REST
adults . . . . . . . .	 from 60 to 80 per minute
children . . . . . . .80 to 100
babies . . . . . . . .100 to 140
PULSE (HEARTBEAT)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
33
The pulse gets much faster with exercise and when a person is nervous, 
frightened, or has a fever. As a general rule, the pulse increases 20 beats per minute 
for each degree (°C) rise in fever.
When a person is very ill, take the pulse often and write it down along with the 
temperature and rate of breathing.
It is important to notice changes in the pulse rate. For example:
•	 A weak, rapid pulse can mean a state of shock (see p. 77).
•	 A very rapid, very slow, or irregular pulse could mean heart trouble  
(see p. 325).
•	 A relatively slow pulse in a person with a high fever may be a sign of typhoid 
(see p. 188).
EYES
Look at the color of the white part of the eyes. Is it normal, red (p. 219), or yellow? 
Also note any changes in the sick person’s vision.
Have the person slowly move her eyes up and down and from side to side. 
Jerking or uneven movement may be a sign of brain damage.
Pay attention to the size and color of the pupils (the black ‘window’ in the center 
of the eye). If they are very large, it can mean a state of shock (see p. 77). If they are 
very large, or very small, it can mean poison or the effect of certain drugs. If there is 
a white glow, it can mean cataracts (see p. 225) or cancer.
Look at both eyes and note any difference between the two, especially in the size 
of the pupils:
A big difference in the size of the pupils is almost always a medical emergency.
•	 If the eye with the larger pupil hurts so badly it causes vomiting, the person 
probably has GLAUCOMA (see p. 222).
•	 If the eye with the smaller pupil hurts a great deal, the person may have  
IRITIS, a very serious problem (see p. 221).
•	 Difference in the size of the pupils of an unconscious person or a person who 
has had a recent head injury may mean brain damage. It may also mean 
STROKE (see p. 327).
Always compare the pupils of a person who is unconscious or has had a 
head injury.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
34
EARS, THROAT, AND NOSE
Ears: Always check for signs of pain and 
infection in the ears-especially in a child with fever 
or a cold. A baby who cries a lot or pulls at his ear 
often has an ear infection (p. 309).
Pull the ear gently. If this increases pain, the 
infection is probably in the tube of the ear (ear 
canal). Also look for redness or pus inside the ear. 
A small flashlight or penlight will help. But never 
put a stick, wire, or other hard object inside the ear.
Find out if the person hears well, or if one side is 
more deaf than the other. Rub your thumb and fingers together near the person’s ear to 
see if he can hear it. For deafness and ringing of the ears see page 327.
Throat and Mouth: With a torch (flashlight) or sunlight examine the mouth and 
throat. To do this hold down tongue with a spoon handle or have the person say 
‘ahhhhh...’ Notice if the throat is red and if the tonsils (2 lumps at the back of the throat) 
are swollen or have spots with pus (see p. 309). Also examine the mouth for sores, 
inflamed gums, sore tongue, rotten or abscessed teeth and other problems. (Read 
Chapter 17.)
Nose: Is the nose runny or plugged? (Notice if and how a baby breathes through 
his nose.) Shine a light inside and look for mucus, pus, blood; also look for redness, 
swelling, or bad smell. Check for signs of sinus trouble or hayfever (p. 165).
SKIN
It is important to examine the sick person’s whole body, no matter how mild the 
sickness may seem. Babies and children should be undressed completely. Look 
carefully for anything that is not normal, including:
•	 sores, wounds, or splinters
•	 rashes or welts
•	 spots, patches, or any unusual markings
•	 inflammation (sign of infection with 
redness, heat, pain and swelling)
•	 swelling or puffiness
•	 swollen lymph nodes (little lumps in the 
neck, the armpits, or the groin, see p. 88)
Always examine little children between the 
buttocks, in the genital area, between the fingers 
and toes, behind the ears, and in the hair (for 
lice, scabies, ringworm, rashes, and sores).
For identification of different skin 
problems, see pages 196 -198.
•	 abnormal lumps or masses
•	 unusual thinning or loss of hair, or 
loss of its color or shine (p. 112)
•	 loss of eyebrows  
(leprosy? p. 191)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
35
THE BELLY (ABDOMEN)
If a person has pain in the belly, try to find out exactly where it hurts.
Learn whether the pain is steady or whether it suddenly comes and goes, like 
cramps or colic.
When you examine the belly, first look at it for any unusual swelling or lumps.
The location of the pain often gives a clue to the cause (see the following page).
See if the belly is soft or hard and whether the person can relax his stomach 
muscles. A very hard belly could mean an acute abdomen—perhaps appendicitis or 
peritonitis (see p. 94).
If you suspect peritonitis or appendicitis, do the test for rebound pain described 
on page 95.
Feel for any abnormal lumps and hardened areas in the belly.
If the person has a constant pain in the stomach, with nausea, and has not been 
able to move her bowels, put an ear (or stethoscope) on the belly, like this:
A silent belly is like a silent dog. Beware!
First, ask the person to 
point with one finger 
where it hurts.
Then, beginning on the opposite side from the spot 
where he has pointed, press gently on different 
parts of the belly to see where it hurts most.
Listen for gurgles in the 
intestines. If you hear nothing 
after about 2 minutes, this is a 
danger sign. (See Emergency 
Problems of the Gut, p. 93.)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
36
These pictures show the areas of the belly that usually hurt when a person has the 
following problems:
Ulcer 
(see p. 128)
pain in the 
‘pit of the 
stomach’
Appendicitis
(see p. 94)
first it
hurts here
later it
hurts here
Gallbladder
(see p. 329)
the pain 
often reaches 
to the back
Liver
(see p. 172, 144, 
and 328)
pain here, 
at times it 
spreads to 
the chest
Urinary system 
(see p. 234)
mid or low back 
pain, often goes 
around the waist 
to the lower part 
of the belly
Inflammation or 
tumor of the ovaries, 
or out-of-place 
pregnancy 
(see p. 280) 
urinary
tubes
Note: For different causes of back pain see p. 173.
bladder
pain on one 
side or both, 
sometimes 
spreading to 
the back
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
37
MUSCLES AND NERVES
If a person complains of numbness, weakness, or loss of control in part of his 
body, or you want to test it: notice the way he walks and moves. Have him stand, sit, 
or lie completely straight, and carefully compare both sides of his body.
Face: Have him smile, frown, open his eyes wide, and squeeze 
them shut. Notice any drooping or weakness on one side.
If the problem began more or less suddenly, think of a head 
injury (p. 91), stroke (p. 327), or Bell’s palsy (p. 327).
If it came slowly, it may be a brain tumor. Get medical advice.
Also check for normal eye movement, size of pupils (p. 217), 
and how well he can see.
Arms and legs: Look for loss of muscle. Notice—or measure—
difference in thickness of arms or legs.
Watch how he moves and walks. If muscle loss or weakness affects the whole 
body, suspect malnutrition (p. 112) or a chronic (long-term) illness like tuberculosis.
Have him squeeze your 
fingers to compare strength 
in his hands
and push and pull with his 
feet against your hand.
Have him lie down and lift one leg
and then the other.
Also have him hold his arms straight
out and turn his hands up and down.
Note any 
weakness or 
trembling.
Any string or 
ribbon will do 
to check if the 
distance around 
the arms or legs 
is different.
If muscle loss and weakness is uneven or worse on one side, in children, think 
first of polio (p. 314); in adults, think of a back problem, a back or head injury, or 
stroke.
For more information on muscle testing and physical examination of disabled 
persons, see Disabled Village Children, Chapter 4.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
38
Check for stiffness or tightness of different muscles:
•	 If the jaw is stiff or will not open, suspect tetanus (p. 182) or a 
severe infection of the throat (p. 309) or of a tooth (p. 231). If the 
problem began after he yawned or was hit in the jaw, he may 
have a dislocated jaw.
•	 If the neck or back is stiff and bent 
backwards, in a very sick child, suspect 
meningitis. If the head will not bend forward 
or cannot be put between the knees, 
meningitis is likely (p. 185).
•	 If a child always has some stiff muscles and 
makes strange or jerky movements, he may be spastic (p. 320).
•	 If strange or jerky movements come suddenly, with loss of consciousness, he may 
have seizures (p. 178). If seizures 
happen often, think of epilepsy. 
If they happen when he is ill, the 
cause may be high fever (p. 76) 
or dehydration (p. 151) or tetanus 
(p. 182) or meningitis (p. 185).
To test a person’s reflexes when you suspect tetanus, see p. 183.
To check for loss of feeling in the hands, feet, or other parts of the body:
Have the person cover his eyes. Lightly touch 
or prick the skin in different places. Ask him to 
say ‘yes’ when he feels it.
•	 Loss of feeling in or near spots or patches 
on the body is probably leprosy (p. 191).
•	 Loss of feeling in both hands or feet 
may be due to diabetes (p. 127)  
or leprosy.
•	 Loss of feeling on one side only 
could come from a back problem 
(p. 174) or injury.
tetanus
meningitis
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
39
Sickness weakens the body. To gain strength and get well quickly, special care is 
needed.
Medicines are often not necessary. But good care is always important. The 
following are the basis of good care:
1. The Comfort of the Sick Person
A person who is sick should 
rest in a quiet, comfortable place 
with plenty of fresh air and light. He 
should keep from getting too hot or 
cold. If the air is cold or the person 
is chilled, cover him with a sheet or 
blanket. But if the weather is hot or 
the person has a fever, do not cover 
him at all (see p. 75).
2. Liquids
In nearly every sickness, especially when there is 
fever or diarrhea, the sick person should drink plenty 
of liquids: water, tea, juices, broths, etc.
3. Personal Cleanliness
It is important to keep the sick person clean. 
He should be bathed every day. If he is too 
sick to get out of bed, wash him with a 
sponge or cloth and lukewarm water. 
His clothes, sheets, and covers must 
also be kept clean. Take care to 
keep crumbs and bits of food out 
of the bed.
CHAPTER
4
The care a sick person receives is frequently  
the most important part of his treatment.
A SICK PERSON SHOULD
BE BATHED EACH DAY
How to Take Care
of a Sick Person
lukewarm 
water
40
4. Good Food
If the sick person feels like eating, let him. Most 
sicknesses do not require special diets.
A sick person should drink plenty of liquids and 
eat a lot of nourishing food (see Chapter 11).
If the person is very weak, give him as much 
nourishing food as he can eat, many times a day. If 
necessary, mash the foods, or make them into soups 
or juices.
Energy foods are especially important—for 
example, porridges of rice, wheat, oatmeal, potato, or 
cassava. Adding a little sugar and vegetable oil will 
increase the energy. Also encourage the sick person 
to drink plenty of sweetened drinks, especially if he 
will not eat much.
A few problems do require special diets. These are explained on the following pages:
anemia. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 124
stomach ulcers and heartburn. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . p. 128
appendicitis, gut obstruction, acute abdomen
(in these cases take no food at all). .  . . . p.   93
diabetes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 127
heart problems. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 325
gallbladder problems. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 329
high blood pressure. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . p. 125
SPECIAL CARE FOR A PERSON 
WHO IS VERY ILL
1. Liquids
It is extremely important that a very sick person drink enough liquid. If he only can 
drink a little at a time, give him small amounts often. If he can barely swallow, give him 
sips every 5 or 10 minutes.
Measure the amount of liquids the person drinks each day. An adult needs to drink  
2 liters or more every day and should urinate at least a cup (240 ml.) of urine 3 or 4  
times daily. If the person is not drinking or urinating enough, or if he begins to 
show signs of dehydration (p. 151), encourage him to drink more. He should drink 
nutritious liquids, usually with a little salt added. If he will not drink these, give him a 
Rehydration Drink (see p. 152). If he cannot drink enough of this, and develops signs 
of dehydration, a health worker may be able to give him intravenous solution. But the 
need for this can usually be avoided if the person is urged to take small sips often.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
41
2. Food
If the person is too sick to eat solid foods, give her soups, milk, juices, broths, 
and other nutritious liquids (see Chapter 11). A porridge of cornmeal, oatmeal, or 
rice is also good, but should be given together with body-building foods. Soups can 
be made with egg, beans, or well-chopped meat, fish, or chicken. If the person can 
eat only a little at a time, she should eat several small meals each day.
3. Cleanliness
Personal cleanliness is very important for a seriously ill person. She should be 
bathed every day with warm water.
Change the bed clothes daily and each time they become dirty. Soiled or 
bloodstained clothes, bedding, and towels of a person with an infectious disease 
should be handled with care. To kill any viruses or germs, wash these in hot soapy 
water, or add some chlorine bleach.
4. Changing Position in Bed
A person who is very weak and cannot turn over alone should be helped to 
change position in bed many times each day. This helps prevent bed sores (see  
p. 214).
A child who is sick for a long time should be held often on her mother’s lap.
Frequent changing of the person’s position also helps to prevent pneumonia, a 
constant danger for anyone who is very weak or ill and must stay in bed for a long 
time. If the person has a fever, begins to cough, and breathes with fast, shallow 
breaths, she probably has pneumonia (see p. 171).
5. Watching for Changes
You should watch for any change in the sick person’s condition that may tell you 
whether he is getting better or worse. Keep a record of his ‘vital signs’. Write down 
the following facts 4 times a day:
Also write down the amount of liquids the person drinks and how many times 
a day he urinates and has a bowel movement. Save this information for the health 
worker or doctor.
It is very important to look for signs that warn you that the person’s sickness is 
serious or dangerous. A list of Signs of Dangerous Illness is on the next page. If 
the person shows any of these signs, seek medical help immediately.
temperature
(how many degrees)
pulse
(beats per minute)
breathing
(breaths per minute)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
42
SIGNS OF DANGEROUS ILLNESS
A person who has one or more of the following signs is 
probably too sick to be treated at home without skilled 
medical help. His life may be in danger. Seek medical 
help as soon as possible. Until help comes, follow the 
instructions on the pages indicated.
  	
	
	
page
	
1. Loss of large amounts of blood from anywhere in the body. .  .  . . . 82, 264, 281
	
2. Coughing up blood. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 179
	
3. Marked blueness of lips and nails (if it is new). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
	
4. Great difficulty in breathing; does not improve with rest. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 167, 325
	
5. The person cannot be wakened (coma). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
	
6. The person is so weak he faints when he stands up . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 325
	
7. Twelve hours or more without being able to urinate. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . 234
	
8. A day or more without being able to drink any liquids. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . 151
	
9. Heavy vomiting or severe diarrhea that lasts for more than one day  
or more than a few hours in babies. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151
	
10. Black stools like tar, or vomit with blood or feces. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . 128
	
11. Strong, continuous stomach pains with vomiting in a person who 
does not have diarrhea or cannot have a bowel movement. .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . 93
	
12. Any strong continuous pain that lasts for more than 3 days. .  .  .  .  . . . . . 29 to 38
	
13. Stiff neck with arched back, with or without a stiff jaw . .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . 182, 185
	
14. More than one seizure (fit) in someone with fever or serious illness. .  . . 76, 185
	
15. High fever (above 39° C) that cannot be 
brought down or that lasts more than 4 or 5 days. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 75
	
16. Weight loss over an extended time. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20, 400
	
17. Blood in the urine. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 146, 234
	
18. Sores that keep growing and do not go away with treatment . 191, 196, 211, 212
	
19. A lump in any part of the body that keeps getting bigger. .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . 196, 280
	
20. Very high blood pressure (220/120 or greater). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . 327
	
21. Problems with pregnancy and childbirth:
any bleeding during pregnancy . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249, 281
high blood pressure (160/110 or greater). .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 249
long delay once the waters have broken and labor has begun . .  .  .  .  . . . . . 267
severe bleeding. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
43
WHEN AND HOW TO LOOK FOR MEDICAL HELP
Seek medical help at the first sign of a dangerous illness. Do not wait until the 
person is so sick that it becomes difficult or impossible to take him to a health center 
or hospital.
If a sick or injured person’s condition could be made 
worse by the difficulties in moving him to a health center, 
try to bring a health worker to the person. But in 
an emergency when very special attention or 
an operation may be needed (for example, 
appendicitis), do not wait for the health 
worker. Take the person to the health 
center or the hospital at once.
When you need to carry a person 
on a stretcher, make sure he is as 
comfortable as possible and cannot 
fall out. If he has any broken bones, 
splint them before moving him (see 
p. 99). If the sun is very strong, rig 
a sheet over the stretcher to give 
shade yet allow fresh air to pass 
underneath
WHAT TO TELL THE HEALTH WORKER
For a health worker or doctor to recommend treatment or prescribe medicine 
wisely, she should see the sick person. If the sick person cannot be moved, have 
the health worker come to him. If this is not possible, send a responsible person who 
knows the details of the illness. Never send a small child or a fool.
Before sending for medical help, examine the sick person carefully and 
completely. Then write down the details of his disease and general condition (see 
Chapter 3).
On the next page is a form on which you can make a PATIENT REPORT. Several 
copies of this form are at the end of this book. Tear out one of these forms and 
carefully complete the report, giving all the details you can.
When you send someone for medical help, 
always send a completed information form with him.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
44
PATIENT REPORT
TO USE WHEN SENDING FOR MEDICAL HELP
Name of the sick person:_ ________________________________Age:___________________
Male_ ___________ Female___________ Where is he (she)?_ ___________________________
What is the main sickness or problem right now?____________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
When did it begin?______________________________________________________________
How did it begin?_______________________________________________________________
Has the person had the same problem before?______________When?_ ________________
Is there fever?_____________________ How high?_____________° 
When and for how long?_________________________________________________________
Pain?____________ Where?_ _________ What kind?___________________________________
What is wrong or different from normal in any of the following?
Skin:___________ Ears:______________________________________________________
Eyes:_ __________ Mouth and throat:___________________________________________
Genitals:_ ________________________________________________________________
Urine: Much or little?_______________ Color?________________Trouble urinating?________
Describe:________ Times in 24 hours:_______________________Times at night:_ _________
Stools: Color?____ Blood or mucus?________________________Diarrhea?_______________
Number of times a day:_____________ Cramps?______________Dehydration?____________
Mild or severe?____________________ Worms?_______________What kind?______________
Breathing: Breaths per minute:______ Deep, shallow, or normal?______________________
Difficulty breathing (describe):____________________________________________________
Cough (describe):_ _____________________________________________________________
Wheezing? ______ Mucus?__________ With blood?___________________________________
Does the person have any of the SIGNS OF DANGEROUS ILLNESS listed on
page 42?_________________________ Which? (give details)_ _________________________
Other signs:
Is the person taking medicine?______ What?________________________________________
Has the person ever used medicine that has caused a rash, hives (or bumps)__________
with itching, or other allergic reactions?_____________________What?__________________
The state of the sick person is: Not very serious:_____________Serious:________________
Very serious:___________________________________________________________________
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
45
 Even in a case of more serious illness, when a medicine may be needed, it is 
the body that must overcome the disease; the medicine only helps. Cleanliness, 
rest, nutritious food, and lots of water are still very important.
Much of the art of health care does not—and should not—depend on use of 
medications. Even if you live in an area where there are no modern medicines, there 
is a great deal you can do to prevent and treat most common sicknesses—if you 
learn how.
If people simply learned how to use water correctly, this alone might do more to 
prevent and cure illnesses than all the medicines they now use. . .and misuse.
For most sicknesses no medicines are needed. Our bodies have their own 
defenses, or ways to resist and fight disease. In most cases, these natural defenses 
are far more important to our health than are medicines.
To help the body fight off or overcome a sickness, often all that is needed is to:
CHAPTER
5
People will get well from most sicknesses 
—including the common cold and ‘flu’—by 
themselves, without need for medicines.
Many sicknesses can be prevented or treated without medicines.
keep clean
get plenty of rest
eat well and drink a 
lot of liquid
Healing Without
Medicines
46
HEALING WITH WATER
Most of us could live without medicines. But no one can live without water. In fact, 
over half (57%) of the human body is water. If everyone living in farms and villages 
made the best use of water, the amount of sickness and death—especially of children—
could be reduced.
For example, correct use of water is basic both in the prevention and treatment of 
diarrhea. In many areas diarrhea is the most common cause of sickness and death in 
small children. Contaminated (unclean) water is often part of the cause.
An important part of the prevention of diarrhea and many other illnesses is to make 
sure that drinking water is safe. Protect wells and springs from dirt and animals by 
putting fences or walls around them. Use cement or rock to provide good drainage 
around the well or spring, so that rain or spilled water runs away from it.
Where water may be contaminated, an 
important part of the prevention of diarrhea 
is to boil or filter the water used for drinking 
or for preparing foods. This is especially 
important for babies. Babies’ bottles and 
eating utensils should also be boiled. If 
regular boiling of bottles is not possible, it is 
safer to use a cup and water spoon. Washing 
hands with soap and water after a bowel 
movement (shitting) and before eating or 
handling foods is also important.
A common cause of death in children with 
diarrhea is severe dehydration, or loss of 
too much water from the body (see p. 151). 
By giving a child with diarrhea plenty of 
water (best with sugar or cereal and salt), 
dehydration can often be prevented or 
corrected (see Rehydration Drink, p. 152).
Giving lots of liquids to a child with diarrhea is more important than any 
medicine. In fact, if enough liquid is given, no medicine is usually needed in the 
treatment of diarrhea.
On the next 2 pages are a number of other situations in which it is often more 
important to use water correctly than to use medicines.
P
R
E
V
E
N
T
I
O
N
T
R
E
A
T
M
E
N
T
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
47
Times When the Right Use of Water
May Do More Good than Medicines
	
	
       PREVENTION
to help prevent	
use water	
see page
1. diarrhea, worms, 	
boil or filter drinking 	
135 
gut infections 	
water, wash hands,  
	
etc.
2. skin infections 	
bathe often 	
133
3. wounds becoming 	
wash wounds well	
84, 89 
infected; tetanus	
with soap and  
	
clean water
	
	
        TREATMENT
to treat 	
use water 	
see page 
1. diarrhea, 	
drink plenty of liquids	
152 
dehydration
2. illnesses with fever 	
drink plenty of liquids	
75
3. high fever 	
remove clothing	
76 
	
and soak body  
	
with cool water
4. minor urinary	
drink plenty of water	
235 
infections 
(common in women)
5. cough, asthma,	
drink a lot of water	
168 
bronchitis, 	
and breathe 
pneumonia,	
hot water vapors 
whooping cough	
(to loosen mucus)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
48
to treat 	
use water	
see page
6. sores, impetigo, 	
scrub with soap	
201, 202, 205, 
ringworm of skin 	
and clean water	
211, 215 
or scalp, cradle cap,  
pimples 
7. infected wounds, 	
hot soaks	
88, 202 
abscesses, boils	
or compresses
8. stiff, sore muscles 	
hot compresses 	
102, 173, 174 
and joints
9. strains and sprains 	
the first day: soak 	
102 
	
joint in cold water;  
	
then use hot soaks
10. itching, burning,	
cold compresses 	
193,194 
or weeping irritations  
of the skin
11. minor burns 	
hold in cold water	
96 
	
at once
12. sore throat or tonsillitis	
gargle with warm 	
309 
	
salt water    
13. acid, lye, dirt, or 	
flood eye with 	
219 
irritating substance 	
cool water at once,  
in eye	
and continue for  
	
30 minutes
14. stuffed up nose 	
sniff salt water 	
164
15. constipation, 	
drink lots of water	
15, 126  
hard stools	
(also, enemas are  
	
safer than laxatives,  
	
but do not overuse)
16. cold sores or 	
hold ice on blister	
232 
fever blisters	
for 1 hr. at first sign
In each of the above cases (except pneumonia) when water is used correctly, often 
medicines are not needed. In this book you will find many suggestions for ways of 
healing without need for medicine. Use medicines only when absolutely necessary.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
49
Some medicines are much more dangerous than others. Unfortunately, people 
sometimes use very dangerous medicines for mild sicknesses. (I have seen a baby 
die because his parents gave him a dangerous medicine, chloramphenicol, for a 
cold.) Never use a dangerous medicine for a mild illness.
REMEMBER: MEDICINES CAN KILL
Guidelines for the use of medicine:
1.	 Use medicines only when necessary.
2.	 Know the correct use and precautions for any medicine you use (see the 
GREEN PAGES).
3.	 Be sure to use the right dose.
4.	 If the medicine does not help, or causes problems, stop using it.
5.	 When in doubt, seek the advice of a health worker.
Note: Some health workers and many doctors give medicines when none is needed, 
often because they think patients expect medicine and will not be satisfied until they 
get some. Tell your doctor or health worker you only want medicine if it is definitely 
needed. This will save you money and be safer for your health.
Some medicines sold in pharmacies or village stores can be very useful. But 
many are of no value. Of the 60,000 medicines sold in most countries, the World 
Health Organization says that only about 200 are necessary.
Also, people sometimes use the best medicines in the wrong way, so that they do 
more harm than good. To be helpful, medicine must be used correctly.
Many people, including most doctors and health workers, prescribe far more 
medicines than are needed—and by so doing cause much needless sickness and 
death.
There is some danger in the use of any medicine.
Only use a medicine when you are sure it is needed 
and when you are sure how to use it.
CHAPTER
6
Right and Wrong Uses
of Modern Medicines
50
THE MOST DANGEROUS MISUSE OF MEDICINE
Here is a list of the most common and dangerous errors people make in using 
modern medicines. The improper use of the following medicines causes many deaths 
each year. BE CAREFUL!
1. Chloramphenicol (Chloromycetin) (p. 356)
The popular use of this medicine for simple diarrhea and other 
mild sicknesses is extremely unfortunate, because it is so risky. Use 
chloramphenicol only for very severe illnesses, like typhoid (see  
p. 188). Never give it to newborn babies.
2. Oxytocin (Pitocin), Ergonovine (Ergotrate), and Misoprostol 
(Cytotec) (p. 390-391)
Unfortunately, some midwives use these medicines to speed up 
childbirth or ‘give strength’ to the mother in labor. This practice is very 
dangerous. It can kill the mother or the child. Use these medicines 
only to control bleeding after the child is born (see p. 266).
3. Injections of any medicine
The common belief that injections are usually better than medicine taken by mouth 
is not true. Many times medicines taken by mouth work as well as or better than 
injections. Also, most medicine is more dangerous injected than when taken by 
mouth. Injections given to a child who has a mild polio 
infection (with only signs of a cold) can lead to paralysis 
(see p. 74). Use of injections should be very limited (read 
Chapter 9 carefully).
4. Penicillin (p. 350)
Penicillin works only against certain types of infections. Use of penicillin for sprains, 
bruises, or any pain or fever is a great mistake. As a general rule, injuries that do not 
break the skin, even if they make large bruises, have no danger of infection; they do 
not need to be treated with penicillin or any other antibiotic. Neither penicillin nor other 
antibiotics helps colds (see p. 163).
Penicillin is dangerous for some people. Before using it, know its risks and the 
precautions you must take—see pages 70 and 351.
5. Gentamicin (Garamycin) and Kanamycin (p. 358)
Too much use of these antibiotics for babies has caused permanent hearing loss 
(deafness) in millions of babies. Give to babies only for life-threatening infections. For 
many infections of the newborn, ampicillin works as well and is much less dangerous.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
51
6. Anti-diarrhea medicines with hydroxyquinolines (Clioquinol, 
di‑iodohydroxyquinoline, halquinol, broxyquinoline: Diodoquin, Enteroquinol, 
Amicline, Quogyl, and many other brand names) (p. 369)
In the past clioquinols were widely used to treat diarrhea. These dangerous 
medicines are now prohibited in many countries—but in others are still sold. They 
can cause permanent paralysis, blindness, and even death. For treatment of 
diarrhea, see Chapter 13.
7. Cortisone and cortico-steroids (Prednisolone, dexamethasone, and others)
These are powerful anti-inflammatory drugs that are occasionally needed 
for severe attacks of asthma, arthritis, or severe allergic reactions. But in many 
countries, steroids are prescribed for minor aches and pains because they often 
give quick results. This is a big mistake. Steroids cause serious or dangerous side 
effects—especially if used in high doses or for more than a few days. They lower 
a person’s defenses against infection. They can make tuberculosis much worse, 
cause bleeding of stomach ulcers, and make bones so weak that they break easily.
8. Anabolic steroids (Nandrolone decanoate, Durabolin, Deca-Durabolin, Orabolin; 
stanozolol, Cetabon; oxymetholone, Anapolon; ethylestrenol, Organaboral. There 
are many other brand names.)
Anabolic steroids are made from male hormones and are mistakenly used in 
tonics to help children gain weight and grow. At first the child may grow faster, but 
he will stop growing sooner and end up shorter than he would have if he had not 
taken the medicine. Anabolic steroids cause very dangerous side effects. Girls grow 
hair on their faces like boys, which does not go away, even when the child stops 
taking the medicine. Do not give growth tonics to children. Instead, to help your 
child grow, use the money to buy food.
9. Arthritis medicines (Butazones: oxyphenbutazone, Amidozone; and 
phenylbutazone, Butazolidin)
These medicines for joint pain (arthritis) can cause a dangerous, sometimes 
deadly, blood disease (agranulocytosis). They can also damage the stomach, 
liver, and kidneys. Do not use these dangerous medicines. For arthritis, aspirin 
(p. 378) or ibuprofen (p. 379) is much safer and cheaper. For pain and fever only, 
acetaminophen (p. 379) can be used.
10. Vitamin B­­12, liver extract, and iron injections (p. 392)
Vitamin B12 and liver extract do not help anemia or ‘weakness’ except 
in rare cases. Also, they have certain risks when injected. They should 
only be used when a specialist has prescribed them after testing the 
blood. Also, avoid injectable iron, such as Inferon. To combat anemia, 
iron pills are safer and work as well (see p. 124).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
52
11. Other vitamins (p. 391)
As a general rule, DO NOT INJECT VITAMINS. Injections are more dangerous, more 
expensive, and usually no more effective than pills.
Unfortunately, many people waste their money on syrups, tonics, and ‘elixirs’ 
that contain vitamins. Many lack the most important vitamins (see p. 118). But even 
when they contain them, it is wiser to buy more and better food. Body-building and 
protective foods like beans, eggs, meat, fruit, vegetables, and whole grains are rich in 
vitamins and other nutrients (see p. 111). Giving a thin, weak person good food more 
often will usually help him far more than giving him vitamin and mineral supplements.
A person who eats well does not need extra vitamins.
For more information about vitamins, when they are necessary, and the foods that 
have them, read Chapter 11, especially pages 111 and 118.
12. Combination medicines
Sometimes, 2 or more medicines are combined in the same pill or tonic. Usually they 
are less effective, and more expensive, when prepared this way. Sometimes they do 
more harm than good. If someone wants to prescribe combination medicines, ask him 
or her to prescribe only the medicine that is really necessary. Do not waste your money 
on unnecessary medicines.
Some medicines for HIV come in combination pills (see p. 397). This makes them 
easier to take.
Some common combination medicines that should be avoided are:
•	 cough medicines which contain medicines both to suppress a cough and also 
to get rid of mucus. (Cough medicines are almost always useless and a waste of 
money, whether or not they combine medicines.)
• 	 antibiotics combined with anti-diarrhea medicine
• 	 antacids to treat stomach ulcers together with medicine to prevent stomach 
cramps
•	 2 or more pain medicines (aspirin with acetaminophen—sometimes also with 
caffeine)
THE BEST WAY TO GET VITAMINS:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
53
13. Calcium
Injecting calcium into a vein can be extremely dangerous. It can 
quickly kill someone if not injected very slowly. Injecting calcium 
into the buttocks sometimes causes very serious abscesses or 
infections.
Note: In Mexico and other countries where people eat a lot of corn tortillas or other 
foods prepared with lime (“cal”, not the fruit), it is foolish to use calcium injections or 
tonics (as is often done to ‘give strength’ or ‘help children grow’). The body gets all 
the calcium it needs from the lime.
14. ‘Feeding’ through the veins (Intravenous or ‘I.V.’ solutions)
In some areas, persons who are anemic or very weak spend their last penny to 
have a liter of I.V. solution put into their veins. They believe that this will make them 
stronger or their blood richer. But they are wrong! Intravenous solution is nothing 
more than pure water with some salt or sugar in it. It gives less energy than a large 
candy bar and makes the blood thinner, not richer. It does not help anemia or make 
the weak person stronger.
Also when a person who is not well trained puts the I.V. solution into a vein, there 
is danger of an infection entering the blood. This can kill the sick person.
Intravenous solution should be used only when a person can take nothing by 
mouth, or when she is badly dehydrated (see p. 151).
If the sick person can swallow, give her a liter of water with sugar (or cereal) 
and salt (see Rehydration Drink, p. 152). It will do as much for her as injecting 
a liter of I.V. solution. For people who are able to eat, nutritious foods do more to 
strengthen them than any type of I.V. fluid.
If a sick person is able to swallow and keep down liquids . . .
Never inject calcium without first seeking medical advice!
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
54
WHEN SHOULD MEDICINE NOT BE TAKEN?
Many people have beliefs about things they should not do or eat when taking 
medicines. For this reason they may stop taking a medicine they need. In truth, no 
medicine causes harm just because it is taken with certain foods—whether pork, chili 
pepper, guava, oranges, or any other food. But foods with lots of grease or spices can 
make problems of the stomach or gut worse—whether or not any medicine is being 
taken (see p. 128). Certain medicines will cause bad reactions if a person drinks 
alcohol (see metronidazole, p. 368).
There are situations when, without a doubt, it is best not to use certain medicines:
1. Pregnant women or women who are breastfeeding should 
avoid all medicines that are not absolutely necessary. 
(However, they can take limited amounts of vitamins or iron 
pills without danger. Also, pregnant or breastfeeding women 
with HIV should take medicines to prevent spreading HIV to 
the baby, see p. 398.)
2. With newborn children, be very careful when using 
medicines. Whenever possible look for medical help before 
giving them any type of medicine. Be sure not to give too 
much.
3. A person who has ever had any sort of allergic reaction— 
hives, itching, etc.—after taking penicillin, ampicillin, a 
sulfonamide, or other medicines, should never use that 
medicine again for the rest of his life because it would 
be dangerous (see Dangerous reactions from injections of 
certain medicines, p. 70).
4. Persons who have stomach ulcers or heartburn should 
avoid medicines that contain aspirin. Most painkillers, and 
all steroids (see p. 51) make ulcers and acid indigestion 
worse. One painkiller that does not irritate the stomach is 
acetaminophen (paracetamol, see p. 379).
5. There are specific medicines that are harmful or dangerous to take when you 
have certain illnesses. For example, persons with hepatitis should not be treated 
with antibiotics or other strong medicines, because their liver is damaged, and the 
medicines are more likely to poison the body (see p. 172).
6. Persons who are dehydrated or have disease of the kidneys should be especially 
careful with medicines they take. Do not give more than one does of a medicine that 
could poison the body unless (or until) the person is urinating normally. For example, 
if a child has high fever and is dehydrated (see p. 76), do not give him more than one 
dose of acetaminophen or aspirin until he begins to urinate. Never give sulfa to a 
person who is dehydrated.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
55
When used correctly, antibiotics are extremely useful and important medicines. 
They fight certain infections and diseases caused by bacteria. Well-known antibiotics 
are penicillin, tetracycline, streptomycin, chloramphenicol, and the sulfa drugs, or 
sulfonamides.
The different antibiotics work in different ways against specific infections. 
All antibiotics have dangers in their use, but some are far more dangerous than 
others. Take great care in choosing and using antibiotics.
There are many kinds of antibiotics, and each kind is sold under several ‘brand 
names’. This can be confusing. However, the most important antibiotics fall into a few 
major groups:
antibiotic group	
examples of	
brand names	
see
(generic name)	
brand names	
in your area	
page
	 	
	
(write in)
PENICILLINS	
Pen-V-K	
	
350
AMPICILLINS*	
Penbritin	
	
352
TETRACYCLINES	
Terramycin	
	
355
SULFAS (SULFONAMIDES)	 Gantrisin	
	
356
COTRIMOXAZOLE	
Bactrim	
	
357
STREPTOMYCIN, etc.	
Ambistryn	
	
353, 361
CHLORAMPHENICOL	
Chloromycetin	
	
356
ERYTHROMYCIN	
Erythrocin	
	
354
CEPHALOSPORINS	
Keflex	
	
358
*Note: Ampicillin is a type of penicillin that kills more kinds of bacteria than do 
ordinary penicillins.
If you have a brand-name antibiotic and do not know to which group it belongs, 
read the fine print on the bottle or box. For example, if you have some Paraxin ‘S’ but 
do not know what is in it, read the fine print. It says ‘chloramphenicol’.
Look up chloramphenicol in the GREEN PAGES 
(p. 356). You will find it must be used only for a few 
very serious illnesses, like typhoid, and is especially 
dangerous when given to the newborn.
Never use an antibiotic unless you know to what group it belongs, what 
diseases it fights, and the precautions you must take to use it safely.
CHAPTER7
Antibiotics: What They Are
and How to Use Them
56
Information on the uses, dosage, risks, and precautions for the antibiotics 
recommended in this book can be found in the GREEN PAGES. Look for the name of 
medicine in the alphabetical list at the beginning of those pages.
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF ALL ANTIBIOTICS
1. If you do not know exactly how to use the antibiotic and what infections it can be 
used for, do not use it.
2. Use only an antibiotic that is recommended for the infection you wish to treat. 
(Look for the illness in this book.)
3. Know the risks in using the antibiotic and take all the recommended precautions 
(see the GREEN PAGES).
4. Use the antibiotic only in the recommended does—no more, no less. The dose 
depends on the illness and the age or weight of the sick person.
5. Never use injections of antibiotics if taking them by mouth is likely to work as 
well. Inject only when absolutely necessary.
6. Keep using the antibiotics until the illness is completely cured, or for at least 
2 days after the fever and other signs of infection have gone. (Some illnesses, like 
tuberculosis and leprosy, need to be treated for many months or years after the person 
feels better. Follow the instructions for each illness.)
7. If the antibiotic causes a skin rash, itching, difficult breathing, or any serious 
reactions, the person must stop using it and never use it again (see p. 70).
8. Only use antibiotics when the need is great. When antibiotics are used too 
much they begin not to work as well.
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF CERTAIN ANTIBIOTICS
1. Before you inject penicillin or ampicillin, always have ready ampules of Adrenalin 
(epinephrine) to control an allergic reaction if one occurs (p. 70).
2. For persons who are allergic to penicillin, use another antibiotic such as 
erythromycin or a sulfa (see p. 354 and 356).
3. Do not use tetracycline, ampicillin, or another broad-spectrum antibiotic for an 
illness that can probably be controlled with penicillin or another narrow-spectrum 
antibiotic (see p. 58). Broad-spectrum antibiotics attack many more kinds of bacteria 
than narrow-spectrum antibiotics.
4. As a rule, use chloramphenicol only for certain severe or life-threatening illnesses 
like typhoid. It is a dangerous drug. Never use it for mild illness. And never give it to 
newborn children (except perhaps for whooping cough, p. 313).
5. Never inject tetracycline or chloramphenicol. They are safer, less painful, and do 
as much or more good when taken by mouth.
6. Do not give tetracycline to pregnant women or to children under 8 years old. It 
can damage new teeth and bones (see p. 355).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
57
7. As a general rule, use streptomycin, and products that contain it, only for 
tuberculosis—and always together with other anti–tuberculosis medicines (see  
p. 361). Streptomycin in combination with penicillin can be used for deep wounds to 
the gut, appendicitis, and other specific infections when ampicillin is not available 
(or is too costly). but should never be used for colds, flu, and common respiratory 
infections.
8. All medicines in the streptomycin group (including kanamycin and gentamicin) 
are quite toxic (poisonous). Too often they are prescribed for mild infections where 
they may do more harm than good. Use only for certain very serious infections for 
which these medicines are recommended.
9. Eating yogurt or curdled milk helps to replace necessary bacteria killed by 
antibiotics like ampicillin and to return the body’s natural balance to normal (see  
next page).
WHAT TO DO IF AN ANTIBIOTIC DOES NOT SEEM TO HELP
For most common infections antibiotics begin to bring improvement in a day or 
two. If the antibiotic you are using does not seem to help, it is possible that:
1. The illness is not what you think. You may be using the wrong medicine. Try to 
find out more exactly what the illness is—and use the right medicine.
2. The dose of the antibiotic is not correct. Check it.
3. The bacteria have become resistant to this antibiotic (they no longer are 
harmed by it). Try another one of the antibiotics recommended for that illness.
4. You may not know enough to cure the illness. Get medical help, especially if 
the condition is serious or getting worse.
These three children had a cold...
Antibiotics do no good for the common cold.  
Use antibiotics only for infections they are known to help.
He got no
risky medicine—
just fruit juice, 
good food, and rest.
What was
the villain?
Penicillin!
(see Allergic
Shock, p. 70)
What took
 the toll?
Why did this child
 get well again?
Chloramphenicol!
(see risks and precautions
for this drug, p. 356)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
58
IMPORTANCE OF LIMITED USE OF ANTIBIOTICS
The use of all medicines should be limited. But this is especially true of antibiotics, 
for the following reasons:
1. Poisoning and reactions. Antibiotics not only kill bacteria, they can also harm 
the body, either by poisoning it or by causing allergic reactions. Many people die each 
year because they take antibiotics they do not need.
2. Upsetting the natural balance. Not all bacteria in the body are harmful. Some 
are necessary for the body to function normally. Antibiotics often kill the good bacteria 
along with the harmful ones. Babies who are given antibiotics sometimes develop 
fungus or yeast infections of the mouth (thrush, p. 232) or skin (moniliasis, p. 242). This 
is because the antibiotics kill the bacteria that help keep fungus under control.
For similar reasons, persons who take ampicillin and other broad-spectrum 
antibiotics for several days may develop diarrhea. Antibiotics may kill some kinds of 
bacteria necessary for digestion, upsetting the natural balance of bacteria in the gut.
3. Resistance to treatment. In the long run, the most important reason the use 
of antibiotics should be limited, is that WHEN ANTIBIOTICS ARE USED TOO MUCH, 
THEY BECOME LESS EFFECTIVE.
When attacked many times by the same antibiotic, bacteria become stronger and 
are no longer killed by it. They become resistant to the antibiotic. For this reason, 
certain dangerous diseases like typhoid are becoming more difficult to treat than they 
were a few years ago.
In some places typhoid has become resistant to chloramphenicol, normally the 
best medicine for treating it. Chloramphenicol has been used far too much for minor 
infections, infections for which other antibiotics would be safer and work as well, or for 
which no antibiotic at all is needed.
Throughout the world important diseases are becoming resistant to antibiotics—
largely because antibiotics are used too much for minor infections. If antibiotics 
are to continue to save lives, their use must be much more limited than it is at 
present. This will depend on their wise use by doctors, health workers, and the people 
themselves.
For most minor infections antibiotics are not needed and should not be used. 
Minor skin infections can usually be successfully treated with mild soap and water, or 
hot soaks, and perhaps painting them with gentian violet (p. 370). Minor respiratory 
infections are best treated by drinking lots of liquids, eating good food, and getting 
plenty of rest. For most diarrheas, antibiotics are not necessary and may even be 
harmful. What is most important is to drink lots of liquids (p. 155), and provide enough 
food as soon as the child will eat.
Do not use antibiotics for infections the body can fight successfully 
by itself. Save them for when they are most needed.
For more information on learning to use antibiotics sensibly, see Helping Health 
Workers Learn, Chapter 19.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
59
SYMBOLS:
=  means: is equal to or 
	
	
 is the same as
+  means: and or plus
HOW FRACTIONS ARE SOMETIMES WRITTEN:
1 tablet = one whole tablet =
1/2 tablet = half of a tablet =
1 1/2 tablet = one and one-half tablets =
1/4 tablet = one quarter, or  
	
	
   one-fourth of a tablet = 
 
1/8 tablet = one-eighth of a tablet (dividing it 
	
	
   into 8 equal pieces and taking 1 piece) =
MEASURING
Medicine is usually weighed in grams (g.) and milligrams (mg.).
1000 mg. = 1 g. (one thousand milligrams make one gram)
1 mg. = .001 g. (one milligram is one one-thousandth part of a gram) 
 
Examples:
Note: In some countries some medicines are still weighed in grains; gr. = grain and 
1 gr. = 65 mg. This means a 5 gr. aspirin tablet weighs about 300 mg.
CHAPTER
8
One adult aspirin
tablet contains
300 milligrams
of aspirin.
      .3 g.
    0.3 g.
    0.300 g.
300 mg.
All these are 
different ways 
of saying 300 
milligrams.
One baby aspirin
contains 75 milligrams
of aspirin.
      .075 g.
    0.075 g.
  75.0 mg.
  75 mg.
All these are 
different ways 
of saying 75 
milligrams.
How to Measure
and Give Medicine
1   +   1   =   2
One     plus     one     equals    two.
60
So if you cut an adult aspirin into 4 pieces, you can give the child 1 piece in place of 
a baby aspirin. Both are equal, and the piece of adult aspirin costs less.
CAUTION: Many medicines, especially the antibiotics, come in different weights and 
sizes. For example, tetracycline may come in 3 sizes of capsules:
Be careful to only give medicine in the recommended amounts. It is very 
important to check how many grams or milligrams the medicine contains.
For example: if the prescription says: Take tetracycline, 1 capsule of 250 mg. 4 times a 
day, and you have only 50 mg. capsules, you have to take five 50 mg. capsules 4 times 
a day (20 capsules a day).
MEASURING PENICILLIN
Penicillin is often measured in units.
Many forms of penicillin (pills and injections) come in doses of 400,000 U.
400,000 U. = 250 mg.
Many times it is important to know how many grams or milligrams are in a 
medicine.
For example, if you want to give a small piece of adult aspirin to a child, instead of 
baby aspirin, but you do not know how big a piece to give...
read the small print on the labels of each.
It says: aspirin: acetylsalicylic acid .3 g.
(acetylsalicylic acid = aspirin)
.3 g. = 300 mg. and .075 g. = 75 mg. So, you can see that one adult aspirin 
weighs 4 times as much as one baby aspirin.
U. = unit	
	
   1,600,000 u. = 1 g. or 1,000 mg.
If you cut the adult aspirin 
into 4 equal pieces, 
each quarter = one baby aspirin
300 mg.	
   1 regular aspirin
75 mg.
75 mg.
75 mg.
75 mg.
4 baby aspirins 
add up to
50 mg.	
+	
50 mg.	 +	
50 mg.	 +	
50 mg.	 +	
50 mg.	 =	
250 mg.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
61
MEDICINE IN LIQUID FORM
Syrups, suspensions, tonics, and other liquid medicines are measured in 
milliliters:
ml. = milliliter	
1 liter = 1000 ml.
Often liquid medicines are prescribed in tablespoons or teaspoons:
1 teaspoon (tsp.) = 5 ml.	
	
1 tablespoon (Tbs.) = 15 ml.
When instructions for a medicine say: Take 1 tsp., this means take 5 ml.
Many of the ‘teaspoons’ people use hold as much as 8 ml. or as little as 3 ml. 
When using a teaspoon to give medicine, it is important that it measure 5 ml. — 
No more. No less.
How to Make Sure that the Teaspoon Used
for Medicine Measures 5 ml.
1. Buy a 5 ml. 
measuring spoon.
or
2. Buy a medicine that comes with a plastic spoon. This 
measures 5 ml. when it is full and may also have a line that 
shows when it is half full (2.5 ml.). Save this spoon and use 
it to measure other medicines.
3. Fill any small spoon that you have 
at home with 5 ml. of water, using a 
syringe or something else to measure, 
and make a mark on the spoon at 
the level of the liquid.
3 teaspoons =	
  1 tablespoon
or
5 ml.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
62
HOW TO GIVE MEDICINES TO SMALL CHILDREN
Many medicines that come as pills or capsules also come in syrups or suspensions 
(special liquid form) for children. If you compare the amount of medicine you get, the 
syrups are usually more expensive than pills or capsules. You can save money by 
making your own syrup in the following way:
When making syrups for children from pills or capsules, be very careful not to give 
too much medicine. Also, do not give honey to babies under 1 year of age. Though 
it is rare, some babies can have a dangerous reaction.
CAUTION: To prevent choking, do not give medicines to a child while she is lying on 
her back, or if her head is pressed back. Always make sure she is sitting up or that her 
head is lifted forward. Never give medicines by mouth to a child while she is having a 
fit, or while she is asleep or unconscious.
HOW MUCH MEDICINE SHOULD YOU GIVE TO CHILDREN  
WHEN YOU ONLY HAVE THE INSTRUCTIONS FOR ADULTS?
Generally, the smaller the child, the less medicine he needs. Giving more than 
needed can be dangerous. If you have information about the doses for children, follow 
it carefully. If you do not know the dose, figure it out by using the weight or age of the 
child. Children should generally be given the following portions of the adult dose:
and mix the 
powder with 
boiled water 
(that has cooled) 
and sugar or 
honey.
You must add lots of sugar or honey 
when the medicine is very bitter 
(tetracycline or chloroquine).
Grind up the 
pill very well
or open the capsule
cool boiled 
water
sugar 
or 
honey
1 kilogram (kg.) = 2.2 pounds (lbs.)
132 lbs.
66 lbs.
33 lbs.
17.6 lbs.
11 lbs.
Adults: 
1 dose
Children  
4 to 7 years: 
1/4 dose
Children  
8 to 13 years: 
1/2 dose
Children  
1 to 3 years: 
1/8 dose
Give a child under 
1 year old the 
dose for a child 
of 1 year, but ask 
medical advice 
when possible.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
63
HOW TO TAKE MEDICINES
It is important to take medicines more or less at the time 
recommended. Some medicines should be taken only once a 
day, but others must be taken more often. If you do not have a 
clock, it does not matter. If the directions say ‘1 pill every  
8 hours’, take 3 a day: one in the morning, one in the 
afternoon, and one at night. If they say ‘1 pill every 6 hours’, 
take 4 each day: one in the morning, one at midday, one in 
the afternoon, and one at night. If the directions are ‘1 every 4 hours’, take 6 a day, 
allowing more or less the same time between pills.
Whenever you give a medicine to someone else, it is a good idea to write the 
instructions and also to have the person repeat to you how and when to take the 
medicine. Make very sure he understands.
	
	
 
To remind people who cannot read 
when to take their medicine, you can 
give them a note like this
In the blanks at the bottom draw the 
amount of medicine they should take and 
carefully explain what it means.
For example:
This means 1 tablet 4 times a day,  
1 at sunrise, 1 at noon, 1 at sunset, and
1 in the middle of the night.
	
 
This means 1/4 tablet twice a day.
This means 2 teaspoons twice a day.
This means 1/2 tablet 4 times a day.	
This means 1 capsule 3 times a day.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
64
WHEN YOU GIVE MEDICINES 
TO ANYONE . . .
Always write all the following information 
on the note with the medicine—even if the 
person cannot read:
• the person’s name
• the name of the medicine
• what it is for
• the dosage
A page of these dosage blanks is included at the end of the book. Cut them out and 
use them as needed. When you run out, you can make more yourself.
When you give medicine to someone, it is a good idea to keep a record of this same 
information. If possible, keep a complete Patient Report (see p. 44).
TAKING MEDICINES ON A FULL OR EMPTY STOMACH
Some medicines work best when you take them when the stomach is empty—that is, 
one hour before meals.
Other medicines are less likely to cause upset stomach or heartburn (chest pain) 
when taken along with a meal or right afterwards.
Take these medicines 
together with or soon after 
meals (or with a lot of water):
•	aspirin and medicine that 
contains aspirin
•	iron (ferrous sulfate)
•	vitamins
•	erythromycin
Take these medicines 
1 hour before meals:
• penicillin
• ampicillin
• tetracycline
It is better not to drink milk an
hour before or after taking
tetracycline.
This information can be put on the same note as 
the drawing for dosage.
Antacids do the most good if you take them when the stomach is empty, 1 or 2 hours 
after meals and at bedtime.
Note: It is best to take medicines while you are standing or sitting up. Also, try to drink 
a glass of water each time you take a medicine. If you are taking a sulfa medicine, it 
is important to drink lots of water, at least 8 glasses a day, to prevent harm to the 
kidneys.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
65
WHEN TO INJECT AND WHEN NOT TO
Injections are not needed often. Most sicknesses that require medical treatment 
can be treated as well or better with medicines taken by mouth. Each year, 
millions of people—especially children—become ill, disabled, or die as a result of 
unnecessary injections. Combating misuse and overuse of medicines is as important 
to good health as vaccination, clean water, or the correct use of latrines. As a 
general rule:
Injections should be used only when absolutely necessary. Except in 
emergencies, they should be given only by health workers or persons trained in  
their use.
CHAPTER
 9
Instructions and Precautions 
for Injections
It is more dangerous to inject medicine 
than to take it by mouth.
The only times medicines should be injected are:
1. When the recommended medicine does not come in a form that can be 
taken by mouth.
2. When the person vomits often, cannot swallow, or is unconscious.
3. In certain unusual emergencies and special cases (see the next page).
WHAT TO DO WHEN THE DOCTOR PRESCRIBES 
INJECTIONS
Doctors and other health workers sometimes prescribe injections when they are 
not needed. After all, they can charge more money for injections. They forget the 
problems and dangers of giving injections in rural areas.
1.	 If a health worker or healer wants to give you an injection, be sure the 
medicine is appropriate and that she takes all the necessary precautions.
2.	 If a doctor prescribes injections, explain that you live where no one is well 
trained to give injections and ask if it would be possible to prescribe a 
medicine to take by mouth.
3.	 If a doctor wants to prescribe injections of vitamins, liver extract, or vitamin 
B12, but has not had your blood tested, tell him you would prefer to see 
another doctor.
66
EMERGENCIES WHEN IT IS IMPORTANT TO GIVE INJECTIONS
In case of the following sicknesses, get medical help as fast as you can. If there will 
be any delay in getting help or in taking the sick person to a health center, inject the 
appropriate medicine as soon as possible. For details of the doses, consult the pages 
listed below. Before injecting, know the possible side effects and take the needed 
precautions (see the Green Pages).
 
Severe pneumonia (p. 171) 	
penicillin in high doses (p. 351)
Gangrene (p. 213)
Infections after childbirth (p. 276)	
ampicillin (p. 352)  
	
and gentamicin (p.358) taken with 
	
metronidazole by mouth (p. 368).
Tetanus (p. 182)	
penicillin (p. 351)  
	
and tetanus antitoxin (p. 388) 
Appendicitis (p. 93-94)	
ampicillin in high doses (p. 352) or 	
Peritonitis (p. 93-94) and bullet wound	
penicillin (p. 352) 
or other puncture wound in the belly	
Poisonous snakebite (p. 105) 	
antitoxins and antivenom (p. 387)
Scorpion sting (in children, p. 106)	
Meningitis (p. 185) when you	
ampicillin (p. 352 and 353) 
   do not suspect tuberculosis	
Meningitis (p. 185) 	
ampicillin together with 
   when you suspect tuberculosis 	
streptomycin (p. 353) and, 
 	
if possible, other TB 
	
medicines (p. 359)
Vomiting (p. 161) when it	
antihistamines, for example,  
   cannot be controlled	
promethazine (p. 385)
Severe allergic reaction and 	
epinephrine (Adrenalin, p. 385)
allergic shock (p. 70) 	
and, if possible, diphenhydramine 
	
(Benadryl, p. 386).
The following chronic illnesses may require injections, but they are rarely 
emergencies. It is best to consult a health worker for treatment.
Tuberculosis (p. 179 and 180)	
streptomycin (p. 361) together  
	
with other TB medicines (p. 359)
Syphilis (p. 237)	
benzathine penicillin in very high  
	
doses (p. 238 and 352)
Gonorrhea (p. 236)	
ceftriaxone (p. 359) 
	
spectinomycin (p. 359)
For these sicknesses
Inject these medicines
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
67
	
	
     WHEN NOT TO INJECT:
Never give injections if you can get medical help quickly.
Never give an injection for a sickness that is not serious.
Never give injections for a cold or the flu.
Never inject a medicine that is not recommended for the illness you 
want to treat.
Never give an injection unless your needle has been boiled or sterilized.
Never inject a medicine unless you know and take all the recommended 
precautions.
MEDICINES NOT TO INJECT
In general, it is better never to inject the following:
1. Vitamins. Rarely are injected vitamins any better than vitamins taken by 
mouth. Injections are more expensive and more dangerous. Use vitamin pills or 
syrups rather than injections. Better still, eat foods rich in vitamins (see p. 111).
2. Liver extract, vitamin B12, and iron injections (such as Inferon). Injecting 
these can cause abscesses or dangerous reactions (shock, p. 70). Ferrous sulfate 
pills will do more good for almost all cases of anemia (p. 392).
3. Calcium. Injected into a vein calcium is extremely dangerous, if not given 
very slowly. An injection in the buttock may cause a large abscess. Untrained 
people should never inject calcium.
4. Penicillin. Nearly all infections that require penicillin can be effectively treated 
with penicillin taken by mouth. Penicillin is more dangerous when injected. Use 
injectable penicillin only for dangerous infections.
5. Penicillin with streptomycin. As a general rule, avoid this combined 
medicine. Never use it for colds or the flu because it does not work. It can cause 
serious problems sometimes deafness or death. Also, overuse makes it more 
difficult to cure tuberculosis or other serious illness.
6. Chloramphenicol or tetracycline. These medicines do as much or more 
good when taken by mouth. Use capsules or syrups rather than injections (p. 355 
and 356).
7. Intravenous (I.V.) solutions. These should be used only for severe 
dehydration and given only by someone who is well trained. When not given 
correctly they can cause dangerous infections or death (p. 53).
8. Intravenous medicines. There is so much danger in injecting any medicine in 
the vein that only well trained health workers should do it. However, never inject into 
a muscle (the buttock) medicine that says ‘for intravenous use only’. Also, never 
inject in the vein medicine that says ‘for intramuscular use only’.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
68
RISKS AND PRECAUTIONS
The risks of injecting any medicines are (1) infection caused by germs entering with 
the needle and (2) allergic or poisonous reactions caused by the medicine.
1. To lower the chance of infection when 
injecting, take great care that everything is 
completely clean. It is very important to boil the 
needle and syringe before injecting. After boiling, 
do not touch the needle with your fingers or with 
anything else.
Never use the same needle and syringe to 
inject more than one person without boiling it 
again first. Carefully follow all of the instructions 
for injecting (see following pages).
Be sure to wash your hands well before 
preparing or giving injections.
2.  It is very important to know what reactions 
a medicine can produce and to take the 
recommended precautions before injecting.
If any of the following signs of allergic or 
poisonous reaction appear, never give the same 
or similar medicine again:
•	 hives (patchy swellings on skin) 
or a rash with itching
•	 swelling anywhere
•	 difficulty breathing
•	 signs of shock (see p. 70)
•	 dizzy spells with nausea  
(wanting to vomit)
•	 problems with vision
•	 ringing in the ears or deafness
•	 severe back pain
•	 difficulty urinating
An abscess like this one comes from 
injecting with a needle that has not 
been well boiled and is not sterile 
(completely clean and germ free).
Hives, or a rash with itching, can appear a few hours or 
up to several days after getting an injection. If the same 
medicine is given to the person again, it may cause a 
very severe reaction or even death (see p. 70).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
69
This child was injected with a needle that 
was not sterile (boiled and completely free of 
germs).
The dirty needle caused an infection that 
produced a large, painful abscess (pocket of 
pus) and gave the child a fever. Finally, the 
abscess burst as shown in the picture below.
This child was injected for a cold. It would 
have been far better to give him no medicine 
at all. Rather than doing good, the injection 
caused the child suffering and harm.
CAUTION: If possible, always give 
medicine by mouth instead of by 
injection especially to children.
To avoid problems like these:
Inject only when absolutely 
necessary.
♦ Boil the syringe and needle 
just before giving the injection 
and be very careful to keep 
them completely clean.
♦ Use only the medicine 
recommended for the disease 
and be sure it is still in good 
condition and not spoiled.
♦ Inject in the correct place. 
Do not inject infants and 
small children in the buttock. 
Instead, inject them in the 
upper, outer part of the 
thigh. (Notice that this child 
was injected too low on the 
buttock, where it is possible to 
damage the nerve.)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
70
DANGEROUS REACTIONS FROM INJECTING
CERTAIN MEDICINES
The following groups of medicines sometimes produce a dangerous reaction called 
ALLERGIC SHOCK a short time after injection:
• penicillins (including ampicillin)
• antitoxins that are made from horse serum
The risk of a serious reaction is greater in a person who has previously been injected 
with one of these medicines or with another medicine of the same group. This risk 
is especially great if the medicine caused an allergic reaction (hives, rash, itching, 
swelling, or trouble breathing) a few hours or days after the injection was given.
To prevent a serious reaction from an injection:
1. Use injections only when absolutely necessary.
2. Before injecting one of the medicines listed above, always have ready 2 ampules 
of epinephrine (Adrenalin, p. 385) and an ampule of an antihistamine like promethazine 
(Phenergan, p. 385) or diphenhydramine (Benadryl, p. 386).
3. Before injecting, always ask if at any other time a similar injection caused itching or 
other reactions. If the person says yes, do not use this medicine or any other medicine of 
the same group, either injected or taken by mouth.
4. In very serious cases, like tetanus or snakebite, if there is a good chance that 
the antitoxin might produce an allergic reaction (if the person suffers from allergies 
or asthma or has had horse serum before), inject promethazine or diphenhydramine 
15 minutes before giving the antitoxin: adults, 25 to 50 mg.; children, 10 to 25 mg., 
depending on their size (see p. 386).
5. After injecting any medicine, always stay with the person for 30 minutes to watch 
for any of the following signs of ALLERGIC SHOCK:
• cool, moist, pale, gray skin (cold sweat)
• weak, rapid pulse or heartbeat
• difficulty breathing
• loss of consciousness
6. If these signs appear, immediately inject epinephrine (Adrenalin): adults, 1/2 ml.; 
children, 1/3 to 1/4 ml, depending on their size. Treat the person for SHOCK (see p. 77). 
Follow by giving an antihistamine in double the normal dose.
scorpion antivenom
snake antivenom
tetanus antitoxin
{
Rarely, ALLERGIC SHOCK may 
result from the sting of a wasp or bee or 
from medicine taken by mouth.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
71
How to Avoid Serious Reactions
to a Penicillin Injection
2. Before injecting ask the person:
“Have you ever had a 
rash, itching, swelling, 
or trouble breathing 
after getting an 
injection of penicillin?”
If the answer is yes, do not use penicillin, 
ampicillin, or amoxicillin. Use another 
antibiotic like erythromycin (p. 354) or a 
sulfonamide (p. 356).
4. After injecting:
always have ampules 
of EPINEPHRINE 
(Adrenalin) ready.
stay with the person  
for at least 30 minutes.
5. If the person becomes very pale, his heart beats very fast, 
he has difficulty breathing, or he starts to faint, immediately 
inject into a muscle (or just under the skin—see p. 167) half 
an ampule of EPINEPHRINE (Adrenalin, a quarter of 
an ampule in small children) and repeat in 10 minutes  
if necessary.
3. Before injecting penicillin:
instead of injections
give penicillin pills
1. For mild to moderate infections:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
72
HOW TO PREPARE A SYRINGE FOR INJECTION
Before preparing a syringe, wash hands with soap and water.
1. Take the syringe apart 
and boil it and the 
needle for 20 minutes.
2. Pour out the boiled 
water without touching 
the syringe or the needle.
3. Put the needle and the syringe 
together, touching only the base of the 
needle and the button of the plunger.
4. Clean the ampule of distilled 
water well, then break off the top.
5. Fill the syringe. 
(Be careful that 
the needle does 
not touch the 
outside of the 
ampule.)
6. Rub the rubber of the 
bottle with clean cloth 
wet with alcohol or boiled 
water.
7. Inject 
the distilled 
water into the 
bottle with 
the powdered 
medicine.
8. Shake until the 
medicine dissolves.
9. Fill the syringe 
again.
10. Remove all air 
from the 
syringe.
Be very careful not to touch the needle with anything—not even 
the cotton with alcohol. If by chance the needle touches your finger or 
something else, boil it again.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
73
WHERE TO GIVE AN INJECTION
Before injecting, wash hands with soap and water.
It is preferable to inject in the muscle of the buttocks, always in the upper outer 
quarter.
HOW TO INJECT
WARNING: Do not inject into an area of 
skin that is infected or has a rash.
Do not inject infants and small children 
in the buttock. Inject them in the upper 
outer part of the thigh.
1. Clean the skin with soap and water 
(or alcohol—but to prevent severe 
pain, be sure the alcohol is dry before 
injecting).
2. Put the needle straight in, all the 
way. (If it is done with one quick 
movement, it hurts less.)
3. Before injecting, pull back 
on the plunger. (If blood 
enters the syringe, take 
the needle out and put it in 
somewhere else).
4. If no blood enters, 
inject the medicine 
slowly.
5. Remove the needle 
and clean the skin 
again.
6. After injecting, rinse the syringe and needle at once. Squirt water through the 
needle and then take the syringe apart and wash it. Boil before using again.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
74
HOW INJECTIONS CAN DISABLE CHILDREN
When used correctly, certain injected medicines, such as vaccinations, are 
important to protect a child’s health and prevent disability. But if injections are given 
with needles or syringes that are not sterilized, the injections may cause a serious 
infection. Unclean needles and syringes can spread germs that cause HIV or other 
serious diseases, such as hepatitis, from one person to another. Dirty needles and 
syringes can also cause infections that lead to paralysis or death. Never inject more 
than 1 person with the same needle or syringe without disinfecting it first.
Some injected medicines can cause dangerous allergic reactions, poisoning, 
deafness, or other harmful effects. For example, pregnant women are often given 
hormone injections to speed up childbirth and ‘give strength’—but these injections are 
dangerous for the mother and can cause brain damage or death of the baby.
For more information on how injections disable children, see Disabled Village 
Children, Chapter 3.
For ideas on teaching people about the danger of unnecessary injections, see 
Helping Health Workers Learn, Chapters 18, 19, and 27.
HOW TO CLEAN (STERILIZE) EQUIPMENT
Many infectious diseases, such as HIV (see p. 399), hepatitis (see p. 172), and 
tetanus (see p. 182), can spread from a sick person to a healthy person through the 
use of syringes, needles, and other instruments that are not sterile (this includes the 
instruments used for piercing ears, acupuncture, tattoos, or circumcision). Many skin 
infections and abscesses also start because of this. Any time the skin is cut or 
pierced, it should be done only with equipment that has been sterilized.
Here are some ways to sterilize equipment:
•	 Boil for 30 minutes. (If you do not have a clock,  
add 1 or 2 grains of rice to the water. When the rice is 
cooked, the equipment will be sterile.)
•	 Or use pressure steaming for 30 minutes in 
a pressure cooker (or an autoclave).
•	 Or soak for 20 minutes in a solution of 1 part chlorine bleach to 7 parts water, or 
in a solution of 70% ethanol alcohol. If possible, prepare these solutions fresh 
each day, because they lose their strength. (Be sure to sterilize the inside of a 
syringe by pulling some solution inside and then squirting it out.)
When you are helping someone who has an infectious disease, wash your hands 
often with soap and water.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
75
BASIC CLEANLINESS AND PROTECTION
When a person is hurt, the most important thing is to help. But you also must 
protect yourself from HIV and other blood-borne diseases. When someone  
is bleeding:
1. 	If possible, show the injured person how to stop the bleeding themselves, by 
applying direct pressure on the wound. 
2. 	If they cannot do this, keep the blood off yourself by 
wearing gloves or a clean plastic bag on your hands, 
and placing a clean, thick cloth directly over the 
wound before applying pressure.
Avoid objects soiled with blood. Be careful not to prick 
yourself with needles or other sharp objects around the 
person you are helping. Cover cuts or other wounds with 
dry, clean bandages to protect them.
Be especially careful when you have to provide first aid where there are many 
people wounded from an accident or fighting.
If you do get blood or other body fluids on you, wash your hands with soap and 
water as soon as possible. If other parts of your body were touched by body fluids 
(especially your eyes), wash them thoroughly with lots of water.
FEVER
When a person’s body temperature is too 
hot, he has a fever. Fever is not a sickness, 
but a sign of many different sicknesses. A 
high fever (over 39°C or over 102°F) can be 
a sign of a dangerous problem, especially 
in a small child.
When a person has a fever:
1. Uncover him completely. Small children 
should be undressed completely and left 
naked until the fever goes down.
 Fresh air or a breeze will not harm a 
person with fever. On the contrary, a fresh 
breeze helps lower the fever.
2. Also take aspirin to lower fever (see p. 378).  
For children, it is safer to give acetaminophen  
(paracetamol, p. 380). Be careful not to give too much.
Never wrap the child in clothing or blankets. 
To wrap up a child with fever is dangerous.
CHAPTER
10
First Aid
NO
This makes the fever go up.
YES
This helps the fever go down.
76
Very High Fevers
A very high fever can be a sign of a dangerous illness. Bring the fever down as soon 
as you can and treat the cause of the fever, if possible. High fever can cause seizures 
(convulsions) and is most dangerous for small children.
When a fever goes very high (over 40°), it must be lowered at once:
1. Put the person in a cool place.
2. Remove all clothing.
3. Fan him.
4. Pour cool (not cold) water over him, or put cloths soaked in cool water on his 
chest and forehead. Fan the cloths and change them often to keep them cool. 
Continue to do this until the fever goes down (below 38°).
5. Give him plenty of cool (not cold) water to drink.
6. Give a medicine to bring down fever. Aspirin or acetaminophen works well, but 
for children under 12 years old it is safer to use acetaminophen.
Dosage for acetaminophen (using 300 mg. adult tablets):
Persons over 12 years: 2 tablets every 4 hours
Children 6 to 12 years: 1 tablet every 4 hours
Children 3 to 6 years: 1/2 tablet every 4 hours
Children under 3 years: 1/4 tablet every 4 hours
If a person with fever cannot swallow the tablets, grind them up, mix the powder with 
some water, and put it up the anus as an enema or with a syringe without the needle.
If a high fever does not go down soon, if the person is 
unconscious, or if seizures (fits, convulsions) begin, continue 
cooling with water and seek medical help at once.
3. Anyone who has a fever should drink lots of water, juices, or other liquids. For small 
children, especially babies, drinking water should be boiled first (and then cooled). 
Make sure the child passes urine regularly. If she does not pass much urine, or the 
urine is dark, give a lot more water.
4. When possible, find and treat the cause of the fever.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
77
SHOCK
Shock is a life threatening condition that can result from a large burn, losing a lot 
of blood, severe illnesses, dehydration, or severe allergic reaction. Heavy bleeding 
inside the body—although not seen—can also cause shock.
Signs of SHOCK:
•   weak, rapid pulse (more than 100 per minute for an adult, more than 140 per 
minute for a child over 2 years old, and more than 190 per minute for a baby)
•  ‘cold sweat’; pale, cold, damp skin
•  blood pressure drops dangerously low
•  mental confusion, weakness, or loss of consciousness.
What to do to prevent or treat shock:
At the first sign of shock, or if there is risk of shock . . .
♦   Loosen any belts or tight clothing the person may be wearing.
♦ 	 Have the person lie down with his feet a little higher than his head, like this: 
However, if he has a severe head injury, put him in a ‘half sitting’ position (p. 91).
♦ 	 Stop any bleeding. Use gloves or a plastic bag to keep the blood off your 
hands.
♦ 	 If the person feels cold, cover him with a blanket.
♦ 	 If he is conscious and able to drink, give him sips of water or other drinks. If 
he looks dehydrated, give a lot of liquid, and Rehydration Drink (p. 152). If he 
does not respond quickly, give intravenous fluids if you know how.
♦ 	 Treat his wounds, if he has any.
♦ 	 If he is in pain, give him aspirin or another pain medicine—but not one with a 
sedative such as codeine.
♦ 	 Keep calm, reassure the person, and seek medical help.
If the person is unconscious:
♦  Lay him on his side with his head low.
♦  If he has vomited, clear his mouth immediately. Be sure his head is low, tilted 
back, and to one side (see above) so he does not breathe vomit into his lungs.
If he has a neck or spine injury, do not tilt his head or move his back.
♦  Do no give him anything by mouth until he becomes conscious.
♦  If you or someone nearby knows how, give intravenous solution (normal saline) 
at a fast drip.
♦ Seek medical help fast.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
78
LOSS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
Common causes of loss of 
consciousness are:
If a person is unconscious and you do not know why, immediately check each of 
the following:
1. Is he breathing well? If not, tilt his head way back and pull the jaw and tongue 
forward. If something is stuck in his throat, pull it out. If he is not breathing, use 
mouth-to-mouth breathing at once (see p. 80).
2. Is he losing a lot of blood? If so, control the bleeding (see p. 82).
3. Is he in shock (moist, pale skin; weak, rapid pulse)? If so, lay him with his head 
lower than his feet and loosen his clothing (see p. 77).
4. Could it be heat stroke (no sweat, high fever, hot, red skin)? If so, shade him 
from the sun, keep his head higher than his feet, and soak him with cold water (ice 
water if possible) and fan him (see p. 81).
How to position an unconscious person:
If there is any chance that the unconscious person is badly injured:
It is best not to move him until he becomes conscious. If you have to move him, do 
so with great care, because if his neck or back is broken, any change of position may 
cause greater injury (see p. 100).
Look for wounds or broken bones, but move the person as little as possible. Do not 
bend his back or neck.
Never give anything by mouth to a person who is unconscious.
very pale skin:
(shock, fainting, etc.)
red or normal skin:
(heat stroke, stroke, heart problems, head injury)
•	 drunkenness
•	 a hit on the head  
(getting knocked out)
•	 shock (p. 77)
•	 seizures (p. 178)
•	 poisoning (p. 103)
•	 fainting (from fright, weakness, 
low blood sugar, etc.)
•	 heat stroke (p. 81)
•	 stroke (p. 327)
•	 heart attack (p. 325)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
79
♦	 Lay him on his back.
♦	 Tilt his head to one side.
♦	 Sit over him like this, with the heel of your 
lower hand on his belly between his navel 
and ribs. (For fat persons, pregnant women, 
persons in wheelchairs, or small children, 
place hands on the chest, not the belly.)
♦	 Make a quick, strong upward 
push.
♦	 Repeat several times if 
necessary.
♦	 If he still cannot breathe, try 
mouth-to-mouth breathing 
(see next page).
DROWNING
A person who has stopped breathing has only 4 minutes to live! You must  
act fast!
Start mouth-to-mouth breathing at once (see next page)—if possible, even 
before the drowning person is out of the water, as soon as it is shallow enough to 
stand.
If you cannot blow air into his lungs, when 
you reach the shore, quickly put him on his side 
with his head lower than his feet and push his 
belly as described above. Then continue  
mouth-to-mouth breathing at once.
WHEN SOMETHING GETS STUCK IN THE THROAT
When food or something else 
sticks in a person’s throat and he 
cannot breathe, quickly do this:
If the person is a lot bigger than you, or is already 
unconscious, quickly do this:
ALWAYS START MOUTH-TO-MOUTH 
BREATHING AT ONCE before trying to get 
water out of the drowning person’s chest.
CHOKING
♦ Stand behind him and 
wrap your arms around 
his waist,
♦ put your fist against his 
belly above the navel and 
below the ribs,
♦ and press into his belly with a sudden strong 
upward jerk.
This forces the air from his lungs and should free 
his throat. Repeat several times if necessary.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
80
WHAT TO DO WHEN BREATHING STOPS:
MOUTH-TO-MOUTH BREATHING
Common causes for breathing to stop are:
• something stuck in the throat
• the tongue or thick mucus blocking the throat of an unconscious person
• drowning, choking on smoke, or poisoning
• a strong blow to the head or chest
• a heart attack
A person can die within 4 minutes if he does not breathe.
Do all of the following as quickly as you can:
Step 1: Quickly use a finger to remove anything stuck in 
the mouth or throat.
If a person stops breathing,
begin mouth-to-mouth breathing IMMEDIATELY.
Step 3: Pinch his nostrils closed with your 
fingers, open his mouth wide, cover his 
mouth with yours, and blow strongly into 
his lungs so that his chest rises. Pause to 
let the air come back out and blow again. 
Repeat about once every 5 seconds. With 
babies and small children, cover the nose 
and mouth with your mouth and breathe 
very gently about once every 3 seconds.
Continue mouth-to-mouth breathing until the person can breathe by himself, or 
until there is no doubt he is dead. Sometimes you must keep trying for an hour or more.
Note: Unless there is an open sore or bleeding in the mouth, it is not possible to give or 
get hepatitis or HIV from mouth-to-mouth breathing.
Step 2: Quickly but gently lay the person face 
up. Gently tilt his head back, and pull his jaw 
forward.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
81
EMERGENCIES CAUSED BY HEAT
Heat Cramps
In hot weather people who work hard and sweat a 
lot sometimes get painful cramps in their legs, arms, or 
stomach. These occur because the body lacks salt.
Treatment: Put a teaspoon of salt in a liter of boiled 
water and drink it. Repeat once every hour until the 
cramps are gone. Have the person sit or lie down in a 
cool place and gently massage the painful areas.
Heat Exhaustion
Signs: A person who works and sweats a lot in hot weather may become very 
pale, weak, and nauseous, and perhaps feel faint. The skin is cool and moist. The 
pulse is rapid and weak. The temperature of the body may rise but is usually normal 
(see p. 31).
Treatment: Have the person lie down in a cool place, raise his feet, and rub his 
legs. Give salt water to drink: 1/2 teaspoon of salt in a liter of water. (Give nothing by 
mouth while the person is unconscious.)
Heat Stroke
Heat stroke is not common, but is very dangerous. It occurs especially in older 
people, very fat people, and alcoholics during hot weather.
Signs: The skin is red, very hot, and dry. Not even the armpits are moist. The 
person has a very high fever, sometimes more than 42°C, and a rapid heartbeat. 
Often he is unconscious.
Treatment: The body temperature must be lowered immediately. Put the 
person in the shade. Soak him with cold water (ice water if possible) and fan him. 
Continue until the fever drops. Seek medical help.
For emergencies caused by cold, see p. 408 and 409.
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ‘HEAT EXHAUSTION’ AND ‘HEAT STROKE’:
HEAT EXHAUSTION	 	
	
	
       HEAT STROKE
• sweaty, pale, cool skin	 	
	
	
    • dry, red, hot skin
• large pupils	
	
	
	
	
    • high fever
• weakness	
	
	
	
	
    • the person is very ill 
	
	
	
 	
	
	
	
       or unconscious
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
82
HOW TO CONTROL BLEEDING FROM A WOUND
2. With a clean thick cloth (or your hand if there is no 
cloth) press directly on the wound. Keep pressing 
until the bleeding stops. This may take 20 minutes or 
sometimes an hour or more. This type of direct pressure 
will stop the bleeding of nearly all wounds—sometimes 
even when a part of the body has been cut off.
Occasionally direct pressure will not control bleeding, especially when the wound is 
very large or an arm or leg has been cut off. If this happens:
♦	 Keep pressing on the wound.
♦	 Keep the wounded part as high as possible.
♦	 You can maintain pressure by binding the 
wound tightly with a bandage or a piece of 
clean clothing.
♦	 Squeeze at pressure points on the artery that 
brings blood to that part of the body. Pressure 
points are where, using the flat part of your 
fingers, you can push the artery against a bone 
to shut off or slow down the flow of blood.
♦	 Keep pressing for 20 minutes before looking to see if the 
bleeding has stopped. Keep pressing with your other hand 
on the wound itself. Applying pressure is hard work—do not 
give up!
PRECAUTIONS:
•	 Using a tourniquet to stop the bleeding usually results in total loss of the arm or 
leg. Only use a tourniquet if you have no other option. Never use a string or wire. 
It can cut right through the skin.
•	 Never use dirt, kerosene, lime, or coffee to stop bleeding.
•	 When bleeding or injury is severe, raise the feet and lower the head to prevent 
shock (see p. 77).
•	 Keep blood from getting into any cuts or sores on your skin (see p. 75).
1. Raise the 
injured part.
PRESSURE POINTS
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
83
HOW TO STOP NOSEBLEEDS
1. Sit quietly and upright.
2. Blow the nose gently to remove 
mucus and blood.
3. Have the person pinch the nose 
firmly for 10 minutes or until the 
bleeding has stopped.
If this does not control the bleeding . . . 
Pack the nostril with a wad of 
cotton, leaving part of it outside 
the nose. If possible, first wet the 
cotton with Vaseline or lidocaine 
with epinephrine (p. 379).
Then pinch the nose 
firmly again. Do not let go 
for 10 minutes or more. Do not tip the 
head back.
Leave the cotton in place for a few hours after the bleeding stops; then take it out 
very carefully.
In older persons especially, bleeding 
may come from the back part of the nose 
and cannot be stopped by pinching it. In 
this case, have the person hold a cork, corn 
cob, or other similar object between his teeth 
and, leaning forward, sit quietly and try not 
to swallow until the bleeding stops. (The cork 
helps keep him from swallowing, and that 
gives the blood a chance to clot.)
Prevention:
If a person’s nose bleeds often, smear a 
little Vaseline inside the nostrils twice a day. Or sniff water with a little salt in it 
(see p. 164).
Eating oranges, tomatoes, and other fruits may help to strengthen the veins so 
that the nose bleeds less.	
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
84
Cleanliness is of first importance in preventing
infection and helping wounds to heal.
CUTS, SCRAPES, AND SMALL WOUNDS
To treat a wound . . .
First, wash your hands very 
well with soap and water.
If the wound is bleeding or oozing, 
wear gloves or plastic bags on your 
hands. Wash the skin around the wound 
with soap and cool, boiled water.
Now wash the wound well with cool, 
boiled water (and soap, if the wound has a lot 
of dirt in it. Soap helps clean but can damage 
the flesh).
When cleaning the wound, be careful to clean 
out all the dirt. Lift up and clean under any flaps 
of skin. You can use clean tweezers, or a clean 
cloth or gauze, to remove bits of dirt, but always 
boil them first to be sure they are sterile.
If possible, squirt out the wound with cool 
boiled water in a syringe or suction bulb.
Any bit of dirt that is left in a wound can 
cause an infection.
After the wound has been cleaned, apply a thin layer of antibiotic cream like 
Neosporin if you have it. Then place a piece of clean gauze or cloth over the top. It 
should be light enough so that the air can get to the wound and help it to heal. Change 
the gauze or cloth every day and look for signs of infection (see p. 88).
If you have a dirty wound or a puncture wound, and have never had a tetanus 
immunization (see p. 388), get one within 2 days.
NEVER put animal or human feces or mud on a wound. 
These can cause dangerous infections, such as tetanus.
NEVER put alcohol, tincture of iodine, or Merthiolate 
directly into a wound; doing so will damage the flesh 
and make healing slower.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
85
LARGE CUTS: HOW TO CLOSE THEM
A recent cut that is very clean will heal faster if you bring the edges together so 
the cut stays closed.
Close a deep cut only if all of the following are true:
• the cut is less than 12 hours old,
• the cut is very clean, and
• it is impossible to get a health worker to close it the same day.
Before closing the cut, wash it very well with cool, boiled water (and soap, if the 
wound is dirty). If possible, squirt it out with a syringe and water. Be absolutely sure 
that no dirt or soap is left hidden in the cut.
There are two methods to close a cut:
‘BUTTERFLY’ BANDAGES OF ADHESIVE TAPE
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
86
STITCHES OR SUTURES WITH THREAD
To find out if a cut needs stitches see if the edges of the skin come together by 
themselves. If they do, usually no stitches are needed.
To stitch a wound:
♦ Boil a sewing needle and a thin thread (nylon or silk is best) for 20 minutes.
♦ Wash the wound with cool, boiled water, as has been described.
♦ Wash your hands very well with boiled water and soap.
♦ Sew the wound like this:
Make the first stitch in the middle of the cut, and tie it closed (1. and 2.).
If the skin is tough, hold the needle with a pair of pliers (or needle holder) that has 
been boiled.
Make enough other stitches to close the whole cut (3.).
Leave the stitches in place for 5 to 14 days (on the face 5 days; the body 10 days; 
the hand or foot 14 days). Then remove the stitches: cut the thread on one side of the 
knot and pull the knot until the thread comes out.
WARNING: Only close wounds that are very clean and less than 12 hours old. Old, 
dirty, or infected wounds must be left open. Bites from people, dogs, pigs, or other 
animals should also be left open. Closing these can cause dangerous infections.
If the wound that has been closed shows any signs of infection, remove the 
stitches immediately and leave the wound open (see p. 88).
HOW TO TIE A 
GOOD KNOT
1.
2.
1.
2.
3.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
87
BANDAGES
Bandages are used to help keep wounds clean. For this reason, bandages or 
pieces of cloth used to cover wounds must always be clean themselves. Cloth used 
for bandages should be washed and then dried with an iron or in the sun, in a clean, 
dust free place.
Make sure the wound has first been cleaned, as shown on p. 84. If possible, 
cover the wound with a sterile gauze pad before bandaging. These pads are often 
sold in sealed envelopes in pharmacies.
Or prepare your own sterile gauze or cloth. Wrap it in thick paper, seal it with 
tape, and bake it for 20 minutes in an oven. Putting a pan of water in the oven under 
the cloth will keep it from charring.
If a bandage gets wet or dirt gets under it, take the bandage off, wash the cut 
again, and put on a clean bandage. Change the bandage every day.
Examples of bandages:
CAUTION: Be careful that a bandage that goes around a limb is not so tight it cuts 
off the flow of blood.
Many small scrapes and cuts do not need bandages. They heal best if washed 
with soap and water and left open to the air. The most important thing is to keep 
them clean.
It is better to have no bandage at all than one that is dirty or wet.
Note: For children 
it is often better to 
bandage the whole 
hand or foot instead 
of one finger or toe. 
The bandage will not 
come off as easily.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
88
INFECTED WOUNDS:
HOW TO RECOGNIZE AND TREAT THEM
A wound is infected if:
•	 it becomes red, swollen, hot, and painful,
•	 it has pus,
•	 or if it begins to smell bad.
The infection is spreading to other parts of the body if:
•	 it causes fever,
•	 there is a red line above the wound,
•	 or if the lymph nodes become swollen and tender. Lymph nodes—often called 
‘glands’ — are little traps for germs that form small lumps under the skin when 
they get infected.
Swollen lymph nodes behind the ear are a sign of an 
infection on the head or scalp, often caused by sores or 
lice. Or German measles may be the cause.
Swollen nodes below the ear and on the neck indicate 
infections of the ear, face, or head (or tuberculosis).
Swollen nodes below the jaw indicate 
infections of the teeth or throat.
Swollen nodes in the armpit indicate an infection of the 
arm, head, or breast (or sometimes breast cancer).
Swollen nodes in the groin indicate an infection of the 
leg, foot, genitals, or anus.
Treatment of infected wounds:
♦	 Put hot compresses over the wound for 20 minutes 4 times a day. Or hold an 
infected hand or foot in a bucket of hot water.
♦	 Keep the infected part at rest and elevated (raised above the level of the heart).
♦	 If the infection is severe or if the person has not been vaccinated against tetanus, use 
an antibiotic like penicillin (see p. 351, 352) and also give metronidazole (p. 368).
WARNING: If the wound has a bad smell, if brown or gray liquid oozes out, or if the 
skin around it turns black and forms air bubbles or blisters, this may be gangrene. 
Seek medical help fast. Meanwhile, follow the instructions for gangrene on p. 213.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
89
WOUNDS THAT ARE LIKELY TO BECOME
DANGEROUSLY INFECTED
These wounds are most likely to become
dangerously infected:
•	 dirty wounds, or wounds 
made with dirty objects
•	 puncture wounds and 
other deep wounds that 
do not bleed much
•	 wounds made where 
animals are kept: in 
corrals, pig pens, etc.
•	 large wounds with 
severe mashing  
or bruising
•	 bites, especially from 
pigs, dogs, or people
•	 bullet wounds
Special care for this type of ‘high risk’ wound:
1. 	Wash the wound well with boiled water and soap. Remove all pieces of 
dirt, blood clots, and dead or badly damaged flesh. Squirt out the dirt 
using a syringe or suction bulb.
2. 	If the wound is very deep, if it is a bite, or if there is a chance that it still has  
dirt in it, give a cephalosporin antibiotic such as ceftriaxone, 1 g. a day 
for 3 to 7 days (p. 358). If you do not have this type of medicine, give 
erythromycin (p. 354), cotrimoxazole (p. 357), or a sulfa drug (p. 356).
3. 	Never close this type of wound with stitches or ‘butterfly’ bandages. 
Leave the wound open. If it is very large, a skilled health worker or a 
doctor may be able to close it later.
The danger of tetanus is very great in people who have not been vaccinated 
against this deadly disease. To lower the risk, a person who has not been 
vaccinated against tetanus should take penicillin or ampicillin immediately after 
receiving a wound of this type, even if the injury is small.
If the wound of this type is very severe, a person who has not been vaccinated 
against tetanus should take large doses of penicillin or ampicillin for a week or more. 
An antitoxin for tetanus (p. 388) should also be considered but be sure to take the 
precautions on p. 70 if using tetanus antitoxin made from horse serum.
If the wound is from an animal bite and there is a chance of rabies (see p. 181), 
get an immunization right away.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
90
CAUTION:
If there is any possibility that 
the bullet has hit a bone, the 
bone may be broken.
Using or putting weight on 
the wounded limb (standing, 
for example) might cause a 
more serious break, like this:
If a break is suspected, it is 
best to splint the limb and not to 
use it for several weeks.
BULLET, KNIFE, AND OTHER SERIOUS WOUNDS
Danger of infection: Any deep bullet or knife wound runs a high risk of dangerous 
infection. For this reason an antibiotic, such as cloxacillin (p. 350) or clindamycin  
(p. 358) should be used at once.
Persons who have not been vaccinated against tetanus should, if possible, be given 
an injection of an antitoxin for tetanus (p. 389), and also be vaccinated against tetanus.
If possible, seek medical help.
Bullet Wounds in the Arms or Legs
♦  	If the wound is bleeding a lot, control the bleeding as shown on page 82.
♦ 	 If the bleeding is not serious, let the wound bleed for a short while. This will help 
clean it out.
♦ 	 Wash the wound with cool, boiled water. In the case of a gunshot wound, wash 
the surface (outside) only. It is usually better not to poke anything into the hole. 
After cleaning, apply a clean bandage.
♦ 	 Give antibiotics.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
91
When the wound is serious, raise the wounded part a little higher than the heart 
and keep the injured person completely still.
Deep Chest Wounds
Chest wounds can be very dangerous. Seek medical help 
at once.
♦ If the wound has reached the lungs and air is being 
sucked through the hole when the person breathes, 
cover the wound at once so that no more air enters. 
Spread Vaseline or vegetable fat on a gauze pad or 
clean bandage and wrap it tightly over the hole like this: 
(CAUTION: If this tight bandage makes breathing more 
difficult, try loosening or removing it.)
♦ Put the injured person in the position in which he feels 
most comfortable.
♦	 If there are signs of shock, give proper treatment (see p. 77).
♦	 Give antibiotics and painkillers.
Bullet Wounds in the Head
♦	 Place the injured person in a ‘half sitting’ position.
♦	 Cover the wound with a clean bandage.
♦	 Give antibiotics (penicillin).
♦	 Seek medical help.
This way the wound will heal 
faster and is less likely to 
become infected.
YES
NO
Walking on an injured leg or 
sitting with the leg hanging down 
will slow healing and encourage 
infection.
Make a sling like this to support an arm with a gunshot wound or other serious injury.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
92
Deep Wounds in the Abdomen
Any wound that goes into the belly or gut is dangerous. Seek medical help 
immediately. But in the meantime:
Cover the wound with a clean bandage.
If the guts are partly outside the wound, cover 
them with a clean cloth soaked in lightly salted, 
cool, boiled water. Do not try to push the guts 
back in. Make sure the cloth stays wet.
If the wounded person is in 
shock, raise his feet higher 
than his head.
Give absolutely nothing by mouth: no food, no 
drink, not even water—unless it will take more than 
2 days to get to a health center. Then give water 
only, in small sips.
If the wounded person is awake and thirsty, let him 
suck on a piece of cloth soaked in water.
Never give an enema, even if the belly swells up 
or the injured person does not move his bowels 
for days. If the gut is torn, an enema or purge can 
kill him.
Inject antibiotics (see the following 
page for instructions).
DO NOT WAIT FOR A HEALTH 
WORKER.
IMMEDIATELY TAKE THE 
INJURED PERSON TO THE 
CLOSEST HEALTH CENTER 
OR HOSPITAL. He will need an 
operation.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
93
MEDICINE FOR A WOUND THAT GOES INTO THE GUT
(Also for appendicitis or peritonitis)
Until you can get medical help, do the following:
Inject ampicillin (p. 352), 1 g. (four 250 mg. ampules) every 6 hours. Also give 
metronidazole (p. 369), 1 g. every 12 hours.  
If possible also give ciprofloxacin (p. 356), 500 mg. every 12 hours.
If there is no ampicillin:
Inject penicillin (crystalline, if possible, p. 352), 5 million Units immediately;  
after that, 1 million units every 4 hours. Also give metronidazole and if  
possible, ciprofloxacin.
OR inject ceftriaxone, 1 g. every 24 hours. Also give metronidazole 
and ciprofloxacin.
If you do not have these antibiotics in injectable form, give ampicillin or penicillin 
by mouth, together with metronidazole and ciprofloxacin and very little water.
EMERGENCY PROBLEMS OF THE GUT (ACUTE ABDOMEN) 
Acute abdomen is a name given to a number of sudden, severe conditions of 
the gut for which prompt surgery is often needed to prevent death. Appendicitis, 
peritonitis, and gut obstruction are examples (see following pages). In women, pelvic 
inflammatory disease (often with vaginal discharge, see p. 243), or an out of place 
pregnancy (in the tubes) can also cause an acute abdomen. The exact cause of acute 
abdomen may be uncertain until a surgeon cuts open the belly and looks inside.
ACUTE ABDOMEN:
Take to a hospital—
surgery may be needed
•	 continuous severe pain that keeps  
getting worse
•	 constipation and vomiting
• 	 belly swollen, hard, person protects it
• 	 severely ill
If a person has continuous severe gut pain with vomiting, 
but does not have diarrhea, suspect an acute abdomen.
LESS SERIOUS ILLNESS:
Probably can be treated
in the home or health center
•	 pain that comes and goes (cramps)
•	 moderate or severe diarrhea
•	 sometimes signs of an infection, 
perhaps a cold or sore throat
•	 he has had pains like this before
•	 only moderately ill
If a person shows signs of acute abdomen, 
get him to a hospital as fast as you can.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
94
Get this person to a hospital as fast as possible. His life is in danger and surgery 
may be needed.
Appendicitis, Peritonitis
These dangerous conditions often 
require surgery. Seek medical help fast.
Appendicitis is an infection of the 
appendix, a finger shaped sac attached to 
the large intestine in the lower right hand 
part of the belly. An infected appendix 
sometimes bursts open, causing peritonitis.
Peritonitis is an acute, serious infection 
of the lining of the cavity or bag that holds 
the gut. It results when the appendix or 
another part of the gut bursts or is torn.
Obstructed Gut
An acute abdomen may be caused by something that blocks or ‘obstructs’ a part of 
the gut, so that food and stools cannot pass. More common causes are:
• a ball or knot of roundworms (Ascaris, p. 140)
• a loop of gut that is pinched in a hernia (p. 177)
• a part of the gut that slips inside the part below it (intussusception)
Almost any kind of acute abdomen may show some signs of obstruction. Because it 
hurts the damaged gut to move, it stops moving.
Signs of an obstructed gut:
Sudden vomiting with great 
force! The vomit may shoot 
out a meter or more. It may 
have green bile in it or 
smell and look like feces.
stomach
small
intestine
large
intestine
APPENDIX
Steady, severe pain in the belly.
This child’s belly is swollen, hard, and very 
tender. It hurts more when you touch it. He tries 
to protect his belly and keeps his legs doubled 
up. His belly is often ‘silent’. (When you put your 
ear to it, you hear no sound of normal gurgles.)
He is usually constipated (little 
or no bowel movements). If there 
is diarrhea, it is only a little bit. 
Sometimes all that comes out is 
some bloody mucus.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
95
Signs of appendicitis:
•	 The main sign is a steady pain in the belly 
that gets worse and worse.
•	 The pain often begins around the navel 
(‘bellybutton’)  
but it soon moves to the lower right side.
•	 There may be loss of appetite, vomiting, 
constipation, or a mild fever.
TESTS FOR APPENDICITIS OR PERITONITIS:
Have the person cough and 
see if this causes sharp pain in 
the belly.
Or, slowly but forcefully, press 
on the abdomen a little above 
the left groin until it hurts a little.
Then quickly remove the hand.
If a very sharp pain (rebound 
pain) occurs when the hand 
is removed, appendicitis or 
peritonitis is likely.
If no rebound pain occurs 
above the left groin, try the 
same test above the right groin.
IF IT SEEMS THAT A PERSON HAS APPENDICITIS OR PERITONITIS:
♦ 	 Seek medical help immediately. 
If possible, take the person where 
he can have surgery.
♦ 	 Do not give anything by mouth 
and do not give an enema. Only if the person begins to show signs of 
dehydration, give sips of water or Rehydration Drink (p. 152) made with sugar 
and salt—but nothing more.
♦ 	 The person should rest very quietly in a half-sitting position.
Note: When peritonitis is advanced, the belly becomes hard like a board, and the 
person feels great pain when his belly is touched even lightly. His life is in danger. 
Take him to a medical center immediately and on the way give him the medicines 
indicated at the top of page 93.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
96
BURNS
Prevention:
Most burns can be prevented. Take special care with 
children:
 	 Do not let small babies go near a fire.
 	 Keep lamps and matches out of reach.
 	 Turn handles of pans on the stove so children 
cannot reach them.
Minor Burns that Do Not Form Blisters (1st degree)
To help ease the pain and lessen the damage caused by a minor burn, put the 
burned part in cold water at once. No other treatment is needed. Take aspirin or 
acetaminophen for pain. Avoid giving aspirin to children.
Burns that Cause Blisters (2nd degree)
Do not break blisters. Do not put ice on the burn.
If the blisters are broken, wash gently with soap and boiled water that has been 
cooled. Sterilize a little Vaseline by heating it until it boils. Let it cool and spread it on 
a piece of sterile gauze. Then put the gauze on the burn loosely so it does not put 
pressure on the wound.
If there is no Vaseline, leave the burn uncovered. Never smear on grease or butter.
If signs of infection appear—pus, bad smell, fever, or swollen lymph nodes—apply 
compresses of warm salt water (1 teaspoon salt to 1 liter water) 3 times a day. Boil 
both the water and cloth before use. With great care, remove the dead skin and 
flesh. You can spread on a little antibiotic ointment such as Neosporin (p. 370). In 
severe cases, consider taking an antibiotic such as dicloxacillin (p. 350), clindamycin 
(p. 358), or ciprofloxacin (p. 358).
Deep Burns (3rd degree) that destroy the skin and expose raw or charred 
flesh are always serious, as are any burns that cover large areas of the body. Take the 
person to a health center at once. In the meantime wrap the burned part with a very 
clean cloth or towel moistened with clean water.
If it is impossible to get medical help, treat the burn as described above. If you do 
not have Vaseline, leave the burn in the open air, covering it only with a loose cotton 
cloth or sheet to protect it from dust and flies. Keep the cloth very clean and change 
it each time it gets dirty with liquid or blood from the burn. Give an antibiotic.
Never put grease, fat, hides, coffee, herbs, or feces on a burn.
Covering the burn with honey helps prevent and control infection and speed 
healing. Gently wash off the old honey and put on new at least twice a day.
It is very important to keep the burn as clean as possible. 
Protect it from dirt, dust, and flies.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
97
Special Precautions for Very Serious Burns
Any person who has been badly burned can easily go into shock (see p. 77) 
because of combined pain, fear, and the loss of body fluids from the oozing burn.
Comfort and reassure the burned person. Give him aspirin or acetaminophen for 
the pain and codeine if you can get it. Bathing open wounds in slightly salty water 
also helps calm pain. Put 1 teaspoon of salt for each liter of cool, boiled water.
Give the burned person plenty of liquid. If the burned area is large (more than 
twice the size of his hand), make up the following drink:
The burned person should drink this as often as possible, especially until he 
urinates frequently. He should try to drink 4 liters a day for a large burn, and 12 liters 
a day for a very large burn.
It is important for persons who are badly burned to eat foods rich in protein 
(see p. 110). No type of food needs to be avoided.
Burns around the Joints
When someone is badly burned 
between the fingers, in the armpit, or at 
other joints, gauze pads with Vaseline 
on them should be put between the 
burned surfaces to prevent them from 
growing together as they heal. Also, 
fingers, arms, and legs should be 
straightened completely several times 
a day while healing. This is painful 
but helps prevent stiff scars that limit 
movement. While the burned hand is 
healing, the fingers should be kept in 
a slightly bent position.
sterile 
gauze 
pads with 
Vaseline
To a liter of water add:
Also put in 2 or 3 tablespoons of sugar or honey and some orange or lemon 
juice if possible.     
half a teaspoon of salt
and half a teaspoon of 
bicarbonate of soda.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
98
BROKEN BONES (FRACTURES)
When a bone is broken, the most important thing to do is keep the bone in a 
fixed position. This prevents further damage and lets it mend.
Before trying to move or carry a person with a broken bone, keep the bones from 
moving with splints, strips of bark, or a sleeve of cardboard. Later a plaster cast can 
be put on the limb at a health center, or perhaps you can make a ‘cast’ according to 
local tradition (see p. 14).
Setting broken bones: If the bones seem more or less in the right position, it is 
better not to move them—this could do more harm than good.
If the bones are far out of position and the break is recent, you can try to ‘set’ or 
straighten them before putting on cast. The sooner the bones are set, the easier it 
will be. Before setting, if possible inject or give diazepam to relax the muscles and 
calm pain (see p. 389). Or give codeine (p. 383).
HOW TO SET A BROKEN WRIST
WARNING: It is possible to do a lot of damage while trying to set a bone. Ideally, 
it should be done with the help of someone with experience. Do not jerk or 
force.
HOW LONG DOES IT TAKE FOR BROKEN BONES TO HEAL?
The worse the break or the older the person, the longer healing takes. Children’s 
bones mend rapidly. Those of old people sometimes never join. A broken arm 
should be kept in a cast for about a month, and no force put on it for another month. 
A broken leg should remain in a cast for about 2 months. 
Pull the hand with a slow, steady force for 5 to 10 minutes, 
increasing the force, to separate the bones.
With one person still pulling the hand, have another gently 
line up and straighten the bones.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
99
BROKEN THIGH OR HIP BONE
A broken upper leg or hip often needs special attention. It is best to splint the 
whole body like this:
and to take the injured person to a health center at once.
BROKEN NECKS AND BACKS
If there is any chance a person’s back or neck has been broken, be very careful 
when moving him. Try not to change his position. If possible, bring a health worker 
before moving him. If you must move him, do so without bending his back or neck. 
For instructions on how to move the injured person, see the next page.
BROKEN RIBS
These are very painful, but almost always heal on their own. It is better not to 
splint or bind the chest. The best treatment is to take aspirin or acetaminophen 
(avoid giving aspirin to children)—and rest. To keep the lungs healthy, take 4 to 5 
deep breaths in a row, every 2 hours. Do this daily until you can breathe normally. At 
first, this will be very painful. It may take months before the pain is gone completely.
A broken rib does not often puncture a lung. But if a rib breaks through the skin, 
or if the person coughs blood or develops breathing difficulties (other than pain), 
use antibiotics and seek medical help.
BROKEN BONES THAT BREAK THROUGH THE SKIN (OPEN FRACTURES)
Since the danger of infection is very great in these cases, it is always better to get 
help from a health worker or doctor in 
caring for the injury. Wear gloves or 
plastic bags on your hands and clean 
the wound and the exposed bone very 
gently but thoroughly with cool, boiled 
water. Cover with a clean cloth. Never put the 
bone back into the wound until the wound and the bone are absolutely clean.
Splint the limb to prevent more injury.
If the bone has broken the skin, use an antibiotic immediately to help prevent 
infection: dicloxacillin (p. 350), clindamycin (p. 358), or ciprofloxacin (p. 358).
CAUTION: Never rub or massage a broken limb 
or a limb that may possibly be broken.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
100
HOW TO MOVE A BADLY INJURED PERSON
If the neck is injured or broken, put tightly folded 
clothing or sandbags on each side of the head 
to keep it from moving.
When carrying, try to keep the feet up, even on hills.
tightly 
folded 
clothing
Have another person put the 
stretcher in place.
With the help of everyone, 
place the injured person 
carefully on the stretcher.
With great care, lift the injured 
person without bending him 
anywhere. Take special care that 
the head and neck do not bend.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
101
DISLOCATIONS
(BONES THAT HAVE COME OUT OF PLACE AT A JOINT)
Three important points of treatment:
♦	 Try to put the bone back into place. The sooner the better!
♦	 Keep it bandaged firmly in place so it does not slip out again (about a month).
♦	 Avoid forceful use of the limb long enough for the joint to heal completely 
(2 or 3 months).
HOW TO SET A DISLOCATED SHOULDER:
Have the injured person lie face down on a table or other firm surface with his 
arm hanging over the side. Pull down on the arm toward the floor, using a strong, 
steady force, for 15 to 20 minutes. Then gently let go. The shoulder should ‘pop’ 
back into place.
Or attach something to the arm that weighs 5 to 10 kg. (start with 5 kg., but do 
not go higher than 10 kg.) and leave it there for 15 to 20 minutes.
After the shoulder is in place, bandage the arm firmly 
against the body. Keep it bandaged for a week to a month. 
To prevent the shoulder from becoming completely stiff, 
unbandage the arm for a few minutes 3 times a day and, with 
the arm hanging at the side, move it gently in narrow circles. 
Do not lift any weight with the arm for a month so the shoulder 
does not pop out of place again.
If you cannot put the dislocated limb back in place, look for 
medical help at once. The longer you wait, the harder it will be 
to correct.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
102
STRAINS AND SPRAINS
(BRUISING OR TEARING IN A TWISTED JOINT)
Many times it is impossible to know whether a hand or foot is bruised, sprained, or 
broken. It helps to have an X-ray taken.
But usually, breaks and sprains are treated more or less the same. Keep the joint 
motionless. Wrap it with something that gives firm support. Use crutches to give a 
sprained foot as much rest as possible. Serious sprains need at least 3 or 4 weeks to 
heal. Broken bones take longer.
To relieve pain and swelling, keep the sprained part raised high. During the first 
day or two, put ice wrapped in cloth or plastic, or cold, wet cloths over the swollen 
joint for 20 to 30 minutes once every hour. This helps reduce swelling and pain. After 
24 to 48 hours (when the swelling is no longer getting worse), soak the sprain in hot 
water several times a day.
You can keep the twisted joint in the correct position for healing by using a 
homemade cast (see p. 14) or an elastic 
bandage.
Wrapping the foot and ankle with 
an elastic bandage will also prevent or 
reduce swelling. Start from the toes and 
wrap upward, as shown here. Be careful 
not to make the bandage too tight, and 
remove it briefly every hour or two. Also 
take aspirin or acetaminophen.
If the pain and swelling do not  
start to go down after 48 hours, seek  
medical help.
CAUTION: Never rub or massage a sprain or broken bone. It does no good and 
can do more harm.
If the foot seems very loose or ‘floppy’ or if the person has trouble moving his toes, 
look for medical help. Surgery may be needed.
After 1 or 2 days use hot soaks.
For the first day soak the sprained 
joint in cold water.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
103
POISONING
Many children die from swallowing things that are poisonous. To protect your 
children, take the following precautions:
SOME COMMON POISONS TO WATCH OUT FOR:
• 	 rat poison
• 	 DDT, lindane, sheep dip, and other  
insecticides or plant poisons
• 	 medicine (any kind when much is  
swallowed; take special care  
with iron pills)
• 	 tincture of iodine
• 	 bleach
• 	 cigarettes
• 	 rubbing or wood alcohol
Treatment:
If you suspect poisoning, do the following immediately:
♦ 	 If the child is unconscious, lay him on his side. If he stops breathing, give him 
mouth-to-mouth breathing (p. 80). 
♦ 	 If the child is awake and alert, give him plenty of water or milk to drink to dilute 
the poison (about 1 glass of water every 15 minutes). 
♦ 	 CAUTION: Do not make a person vomit if he has swallowed kerosene, 
gasoline (petrol), bleach, paint thinner, or strong acids or corrosive substances 
(lye), or if he is unconscious.
♦ 	 If the child is awake and alert and you are sure vomiting is safe, make him vomit. 
Put your finger in his throat or make him drink very salty water.
♦ 	 If you have it, give him half a cup of activated charcoal (p. 388), or a 
tablespoon of powdered charcoal mixed into a glass of warm water. 
Cover the person if he feels cold, but avoid too much heat. If poisoning is severe, 
look for medical help.
Never keep kerosene, gasoline, or 
other poisons in cola or soft drink 
bottles, because children 
may try to drink them.
• 	 poisonous leaves, seeds, 
berries, or mushrooms
• 	 castor beans
• 	 matches
• 	 kerosene, paint thinner, 
gasoline, petrol, lighter fluid
• 	 lye or caustic soda
• 	 salt—if too much is given to 
babies and small children
• 	 spoiled food (see p. 135)
Keep all poisons out of 
reach of children.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
104
SNAKEBITE
Note: Try to get information on the kinds of 
snakes in your area and put it on this page.
POISONOUS 
SNAKE
NON-POISONOUS 
SNAKE
fang marks
  The bite of most poisonous snakes 
leaves marks of the 2 fangs (and sometimes, little 
marks made by the other teeth).
  The bite of a snake that is not 
poisonous leaves only 2 rows of teeth marks, but 
no fang marks.
RATTLESNAKE— 
North America. 
Mexico, and 
Central America 
When someone has been bitten by a snake, try to find out if the snake was 
poisonous or harmless. Their bite marks are different:
People often believe that certain harmless snakes are poisonous. Try to find out 
which of the snakes in your area are truly poisonous and which are not. Contrary to 
popular opinion, boa constrictors and pythons are not poisonous. Please do not kill 
non-poisonous snakes, because they do no harm. On the contrary, they kill mice and 
other pests that do lots of damage. Some even kill poisonous snakes.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
105
Treatment for poisonous snakebite:
1. Stay quiet; do not move the bitten part. The more it is moved, the faster the 
poison will spread through the body. If the bite is on the foot, the person should not 
walk at all. Send for medical help.
2. Remove jewelry because swelling 
can spread rapidly.
3. Wrap the bitten area with a wide 
elastic bandage or clean cloth to slow the 
spread of poison. Keeping the arm or leg 
very still, wrap it tightly, but not so tight 
it stops the pulse at the wrist or on top 
of the foot. If you cannot feel the pulse, 
loosen the bandage a little.
4. Wind the bandage over the hand 
or foot, and up the whole arm or leg. 
Make sure you can still feel the pulse.
5. Then, put on a splint to prevent 
the limb from moving (see p. 14).
6. Carry the person, on a stretcher if possible, to the nearest health center. 
If you can, also take the snake, because different snakes may require different 
antivenoms (antitoxins, see p. 387). If an antivenom is needed, leave the bandage 
on until the injection is ready, and take all precautions for ALLERGIC SHOCK 
(see p. 70). Also give tetanus antitoxin (p. 388). If there is no need for antivenom, 
remove the bandage.
Poisonous snakebite is dangerous. Send for medical help—but always do the 
things explained above at once.
Most folk remedies for snakebite do little if any good (see p. 3).
Some treatments can cause infection or make the effects of the venom worse.
Do not:
• cut the skin or the flesh around the bite
• tie anything tight around the bite or the person’s body
• put ice on or around the bite
• shock the person with electricity
• try to suck the blood or the venom out of the bite
Never drink alcohol after a snakebite. It makes things worse!
Have antivenoms for snakes in your area ready and
know how to use them—before someone is bitten!
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
106
BITE OF THE BEADED LIZARD (GILA MONSTER)
The bite of the beaded lizard is 
treated just like a poisonous snakebite, 
except that there are no good 
antivenoms for it. The bite can be very 
dangerous. Wash the bite area well. 
Avoid movement and keep the bite 
below the level of the heart.
SCORPION STING
Some scorpions are far more poisonous than others. To 
adults, scorpion stings are rarely dangerous. Take aspirin or 
acetaminophen and if possible put ice on the sting to help 
calm the pain. For the numbness and pain that sometimes last 
weeks or months, hot compresses may be helpful (see p. 193).
To children under 5 years old, scorpion stings can be 
dangerous, especially if the sting is on the head or body. In 
some countries scorpion antitoxin is available (p. 387). To do 
much good it must be injected within 2 hours after the child has been stung. Give 
acetaminophen for the pain. If the child stops breathing, use mouth to mouth breathing 
(see p. 80). Also give tetanus antitoxin (see p. 388). If the child who was stung is very 
young or has been stung on the main part of the body, or if you know the scorpion was 
of a deadly type, seek medical help fast.
BLACK WIDOW 
AND OTHER SPIDER BITES
The majority of spider bites, including that of the 
tarantula, are painful but not dangerous. The bite of a 
few kinds of spiders—such as the ‘black widow’ and 
related species—can make an adult quite ill. They 
can be dangerous for a small child. A black widow 
bite often causes painful muscle cramps all over 
the body, and extreme pain in the stomach muscles 
which become rigid. (Sometimes this is confused 
with appendicitis!)
Give acetaminophen or aspirin and look for 
medical help. Most cures sold in stores are a waste of money and do not help. 
Diazepam, p. 390, may help reduce muscular spasms. If signs of shock develop, treat 
for allergic shock, p. 70. Injections of cortisone may be needed in children. Also give 
tetanus antitoxin (see p. 388). A good antivenom exists but is hard to get.
Southern 
U.S.A. and 
Northern 
Mexico
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
107
SICKNESSES CAUSED BY NOT EATING WELL
Good food is needed for a person to grow well, work hard, 
and stay healthy. Many common sicknesses come from not 
eating enough.
A person who is weak or sick because he does not eat 
enough, or does not eat the foods his body needs, is said 
to be poorly nourished—or malnourished. He suffers from 
malnutrition.
Poor nutrition can result in the following health problems:
in children
CHAPTER
 11
•	 failure of a child to grow or gain 
weight normally (see p. 297)
•	 slowness in walking, talking, or 
thinking
•	 big bellies, thin arms and legs
•	 common illnesses and 
infections that last longer, are 
more severe, and more often 
cause death
•   lack of energy, child is sad and does 
not play
•   swelling of feet, face, and hands, often 
with sores or marks on the skin
•   thinning, straightening, or loss of hair, 
or loss of its color and shine
•   poor vision at night, dryness of eyes, 
blindness
Nutrition:
What to Eat to Be Healthy
in anyone
•	 weakness and tiredness	
	
   •   sores in the corners of the mouth 
•	 loss of appetite	
	
	
   •   painful or sore tongue
•	 anemia	
	
	
	
   •   ‘burning’ or numbness of the feet
Although the following problems may have other causes, they are sometimes 
caused and are often made worse by not eating well:
•	 diarrhea	
	
	
	
   •   stomach discomfort
•	 frequent infections	
         	
	
   •   dryness and cracking of the skin
•	 ringing or buzzing in the ears	
   •   heavy pulsing of the heart or of the
•	 headache	
	
	
	
        ‘pit’ of the stomach (palpitations)
•	 bleeding or redness of the gums	
   •   anxiety (nervous worry) and various
•	 skin bruises easily	
	
	
        nerve or mental problems
•	 nosebleeds	 	
	
         	
   •   cirrhosis (liver disease)
Poor nutrition during pregnancy causes weakness and anemia in the mother 
and increases the risk of her dying during or after childbirth. It is also a cause of 
miscarriage, or of the baby being born dead, too small, or with a disability.
108
Not eating well may be the direct cause of the health problems just listed. But most 
important, poor nutrition weakens the body’s ability to resist all kinds of diseases, 
especially infections:
•   Poorly nourished children are much more likely to get severe diarrhea, and to die 
from it, than are children who are well nourished.
•   Measles is especially dangerous where many children are malnourished.
•   Tuberculosis is more common, and gets worse more rapidly, in those who are 
malnourished.
•   Cirrhosis of the liver, which comes in part from drinking too much alcohol, is more 
common and worse in persons who are poorly nourished.
•   Even minor problems like the common cold are usually worse, last longer, or lead 
to pneumonia more often in persons who are poorly nourished.
EATING WELL AND 
KEEPING CLEAN 
ARE THE BEST 
GUARANTEES     
OF GOOD HEALTH.
Eating right helps the body resist sickness.
Eating right helps the sick get well.
Not only does good food help prevent disease, it helps the sick body fight disease 
and become well again. So when a person is sick, eating enough nutritious food is 
especially important.
Unfortunately, some mothers stop feeding a child or stop giving certain nutritious 
foods when he is sick or has diarrhea—so the child becomes weaker, cannot fight 
off the illness, and may die. Sick children need food! If a sick child will not eat, 
encourage him to do so.
Feed him as much as he will eat and drink. And be patient. A sick child often does 
not want to eat much. So feed him something many times during the day. Also, try to 
make sure that he drinks a lot of liquid so that he pees (passes urine) several times a 
day. If the child will not take solid foods, mash them and give them as a mush or gruel.
Often the signs of poor nutrition first appear when a person has some other 
sickness. For example, a child who has had diarrhea for several days may develop 
swollen hands and feet, a swollen face, dark spots, or peeling sores on his legs. These 
are signs of severe malnutrition. The child needs more good food! And more often. 
Feed him many times during the day.
During and after any sickness, it is very important to eat well.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
109
WHY IT IS IMPORTANT TO EAT RIGHT
People who do not eat right develop malnutrition. This can happen from not 
eating enough food of any kind (general malnutrition or ‘undernutrition’), from not 
eating the right kinds of foods (specific types of malnutrition), or from eating too 
much of certain foods (getting too fat, see p. 126).
Anyone can develop general malnutrition, but it is especially dangerous for:
•   children, because they need lots of food to grow well and stay healthy;
•   women of child bearing age, especially if they are pregnant or breastfeeding, 
because they need extra food to stay healthy, to have healthy babies, and to 
do their daily work;
•   elderly persons, because often they lose their teeth and their taste for food, 
so they cannot eat much at one time, even though they still need to eat well to 
stay healthy;
•   people with HIV, because they need more food to fight their infection.
A malnourished child does not grow well. She generally is thinner and shorter 
than other children. Also, she is more likely to be irritable, to cry a lot, to move 
and play less than other children, and to get sick more often. If the child also gets 
diarrhea or other infections, she will lose weight. A good way to check if a child is 
poorly nourished is to measure the distance around her upper arm.
Checking Children for Malnutrition: The Sign of the Upper Arm
After 1 year of age, any child whose middle 
upper arm measures less than 11 ½ cm. around is 
malnourished — no matter how ‘fat’ his feet, hands, 
and face may look. If the arm measures between 11 ½ 
and 12 ½ cm., he is at risk of becoming malnourished.
Another good way to tell if a child is well nourished 
or poorly nourished is to weigh him regularly: once a 
month in the first year, then once every 3 months. A 
healthy, well nourished child gains weight regularly. The 
weighing of children and the use of the Child Health 
Chart are discussed fully in Chapter 21.
PREVENTING MALNUTRITION
To stay healthy, our bodies need plenty of good food. The food we eat has to fill 
many needs. First, it should provide enough energy to keep us active and strong. 
Also, it must help build, repair, and protect the different parts of our bodies. To do 
all this we need to eat a combination of foods every day.
less than 
11 ½ cm.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
110
MAIN FOODS AND HELPER FOODS
In much of the world, most people eat one main low-cost food with almost every 
meal. Depending on the region, this may be rice, maize, millet, wheat, cassava, potato, 
breadfruit, or banana. This main food usually provides most of the body’s daily 
food needs.
However, the main food alone is not enough to keep a person healthy. Certain 
helper foods are needed. This is especially true for growing children, women who are 
pregnant or breastfeeding, and older people.
Even if a child regularly gets enough of the main food to fill her, she may become 
thin and weak. This is because the main food often has so much water and fiber in it, 
that the child’s belly fills up before she gets enough energy to help her grow.
We can do 2 things to help meet such children’s energy needs:
1. 	Feed children more often­—at least 5 times a day when a child is very young, too 
thin, or not growing well. Also give her snacks between meals.
CHILDREN, LIKE CHICKENS, 
SHOULD ALWAYS BE PECKING.
If the child’s belly fills up 
before her energy needs 
are met, the child will 
become thin and weak.
To meet her energy needs, a child would 
need to eat this much boiled rice.
But she needs only this much rice when 
some vegetable oil is mixed in.
 High energy foods added to the main food help to supply extra energy. Also, 2 other 
kinds of helper foods should be added to the main food:
 When possible, add body–building foods (proteins) such as beans, milk, eggs, 
groundnuts, fish, and meat.
 Also try to add protective foods such as orange or yellow fruits and vegetables, 
and also dark green leafy vegetables. Protective foods supply important vitamins and 
minerals (see p. 113).
2. 	Also add high energy ‘helper foods’ such as oils and sugar or honey to the main 
food. It is best to add vegetable oil or foods containing oils—nuts, groundnuts 
(peanuts), or seeds, especially pumpkin or sesame seeds.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
111
EATING RIGHT TO STAY HEALTHY
The ‘main food’ your family eats usually provides most—but not all—of the 
body’s energy and other nutritional needs. By adding helper foods to the main food 
you can make low cost nutritious meals. You do not have to eat all the foods listed 
here to be healthy. Eat the main foods you are accustomed to, and add whatever 
‘helper foods’ are available in your area. Try to include ‘helper foods’ from each 
group, as often as possible.
Note to nutrition workers: This plan for meeting food needs resembles teaching about 
‘food groups’, but places more importance on giving enough of the traditional ‘main 
food’ and above all, giving frequent feedings with plenty of energy-rich helpers. 
This approach is more adaptable to the resources and limitations of poor families.
REMEMBER: Feeding children 
enough and feeding them 
often (3 to 5 times a day) is 
usually more important than the 
types of food you feed them.
(energy helpers)
Examples:
Fats (vegetable oils, butter, ghee, lard)
Foods rich in fats (coconut, olives, fatty meat)
Nuts* (groundnuts, almonds, walnuts, cashews)
Oil seeds (pumpkin, melon, sesame,	sunflower)
Sugars (sugar, honey, molasses, 
sugar cane, jaggery)
* Note: Nuts and oil seeds are also 
valuable as body-building
helpers.
Cereals and grains (wheat, maize, rice, millet, sorghum)
Starchy roots (cassava, potatoes, taro)
Starchy fruits (banana, plantain, breadfruit)
Note: Main foods are cheap 
sources of energy. The cereals 
also provide some protein, iron, 
and vitamins—at low cost.
(vitamins and minerals 
or protective helpers)
Examples:
Vegetables (dark green leafy plants, 
tomatoes, carrots, pumpkin, 
sweet potato, and peppers)
Fruits (mangoes, oranges, papayas)
Examples:
(proteins or body-building helpers)
Examples:
Legumes (beans, peas, and lentils)
Nuts (groundnuts, walnuts, cashews, and almonds)
Oil seeds (sesame and sunflower)
Animal products (milk, eggs, cheese, yogurt, fish, 
chicken, meat, small animals such as mice, 
and insects)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
112
HOW TO RECOGNIZE MALNUTRITION
Among poor people, malnutrition is often most severe in children, who need 
lots of nutritious food to grow well and stay healthy. There are different forms of 
malnutrition:
MILD MALNUTRITION
This is the most common form, but it is not always obvious. 
The child simply does not grow or gain weight as fast as a well-
nourished child. Although he may appear rather small and thin, 
he usually does not look sick. However, because he is poorly 
nourished, he may lack strength (resistance) to fight infections. 
So he becomes more seriously ill and takes longer to get well 
than a well nourished child.
Children with this form of malnutrition suffer more from 
diarrhea and colds. Their colds usually last longer and are more 
likely to turn into pneumonia. Measles, tuberculosis, and many 
other infectious diseases are far more dangerous for these 
malnourished children. More of them die.
It is important that children like these get special care and enough food before they 
become seriously ill. This is why regular weighing or measuring around the middle 
upper arm of young children is so important. It helps us to recognize mild malnutrition 
early and correct it.
Follow the guidelines for preventing malnutrition.
SEVERE MALNUTRITION
This occurs most often in babies who stopped breastfeeding early or suddenly, 
and who are not given sufficient high energy foods often enough. Severe malnutrition 
often starts when a child has diarrhea or another infection. We can usually recognize 
children who are severely malnourished without taking any measurements. The 2 main 
examples are:
DRY MALNUTRITION—OR MARASMUS
This child does not get enough of 
any kind of food. He is said to have dry 
malnutrition or marasmus. In other words, 
he is starved. His body is small, very thin 
and wasted. He is little more than skin  
and bones.
This child needs more food—especially 
energy foods.
THIS CHILD IS JUST SKIN AND BONES.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
113
WET MALNUTRITION—OR KWASHIORKOR
This child’s condition is called 
wet malnutrition because his feet, 
hands, and face are swollen. This 
can happen when a child does not 
eat enough ‘body building’ helper 
foods—or proteins. More often it 
happens when he does not get 
enough energy foods, and his body 
burns up whatever proteins he eats 
for energy.
Eating beans, lentils, or other 
foods that have been stored in a 
damp place and are a little moldy 
may also be part of the cause.
This child needs more food more 
often—a lot of foods rich in energy, 
and some foods rich in protein (see 
p. 111).
Also, try to avoid foods that are old, 
and may be spoiled or moldy.
OTHER FORMS OF MALNUTRITION
Other forms of malnutrition may result when certain vitamins and minerals are 
missing from the foods people eat. Many of these specific types of malnutrition are 
discussed more fully later in this chapter and in other parts of this book:
•	 Night blindness in children who do not get enough vitamin A (see p. 226).
•	 Rickets from lack of vitamin D (see p. 125).
•	 Various skin problems, sores on the lips and mouth, or bleeding gums 
from not eating enough fruits, vegetables, and other foods containing certain 
vitamins (see p. 208 and 232).
•	 Anemia in people who do not get enough iron (see p. 124).
•	 Goiter from lack of iodine (see p. 130).
For more information about health problems related to nutrition, see Helping Health 
Workers Learn, Chapter 25, and Disabled Village Children, Chapters 13 and 30.
First the child becomes swollen. The other 
signs come later.
This child is skin, bones, and water.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
114
This mother and child are from a poor family and are both poorly nourished. The 
father works hard, but he does not earn enough to feed the family well. The patches on 
the mother’s arms are a sign of pellagra, a type of malnutrition. She ate mostly maize 
and not enough nutritious foods such as beans, eggs, fruit, meat, and dark green 
vegetables.
The mother did not breastfeed her baby. She fed him only maize porridge. Although 
this filled his belly, it did not provide enough nutrition for him to grow strong. As a result, 
this 2 year old child is severely malnourished. He is very small and thin with a swollen 
belly, his hair is thin, and his physical and mental development will be slower than 
normal. To prevent this, mothers and their children need to eat better.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
115
WAYS OF EATING BETTER WHEN YOU
DO NOT HAVE MUCH MONEY OR LAND
There are many reasons for hunger and poor nutrition. One main reason is 
poverty. In many parts of the world a few people own most of the wealth and the 
land. They may grow crops like coffee or tobacco, which they sell to make money, 
but which have no food value. Or the poor may farm small plots of borrowed land, 
while the owners take a big share of the harvest. The problem of hunger and poor 
nutrition will never be completely solved until people learn to share with each 
other fairly.
But there are many things people can do to eat better at low cost—and by eating 
well gain strength to stand up for their rights. On pages w13 and w14 of “Words to 
the Village Health Worker” are several suggestions for increasing food production. 
These include improved use of land through rotating crops, contour ditches, and 
irrigation; also ideas for breeding fish, beekeeping, grain storage, and family 
gardens. If the whole village or a group of families works together on some of these 
things, a lot can be done to improve nutrition.
When considering the question of food and land, it is important to remember that 
a given amount of land can feed only a certain number of persons. For this reason, 
some people argue that ‘the small family lives better’. However, for many poor 
families, to have many children is an economic necessity. By the time they are 10 or 
12 years old, children of poor families often produce more than they cost. Having a 
lot of children increases the chance that parents will receive the help and care they 
need in old age.
In short, lack of social and economic security creates the need for parents 
to have many children. Therefore, the answer to gaining a balance between 
people and land does not lie in telling poor people to have small families. It lies 
in redistributing the land more fairly, paying fair wages, and taking other steps to 
overcome poverty. Only then can people afford small families and hope to achieve 
a lasting balance between people and land. (For a discussion of health, food, and 
social problems, see Helping Health Workers Learn.)
When money is limited, it is important to use it wisely. This means cooperation 
and looking ahead. Too often the father of a poor family will spend the little bit of 
money he has on alcohol and tobacco rather than on buying nutritious food, a hen to 
lay eggs, or something to improve the family’s health. Men who drink together would 
do well to get together sometime when they are sober, to discuss these problems 
and look for a healthy solution.
Also, some parents buy sweets or soft drinks (fizzy drinks) for their children when 
they could spend the same money buying eggs, milk, nuts or other nutritious foods. 
This way their children could become more healthy for the same amount of money. 
Discuss this with the families and look for solutions.
IF YOU HAVE A LITTLE MONEY  
AND WANT TO HELP YOUR CHILD GROW STRONG:
DO NOT BUY HIM A SOFT DRINK OR SWEETS—
BUY HIM 2 EGGS OR A HANDFUL OF NUTS.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
116
Better Foods at Low Cost
Many of the world’s people eat a lot of bulky, starchy foods, without adding enough 
helper foods to provide the extra energy, body building, and protection they need. This 
is partly because many helper foods are expensive—especially those that come from 
animals, like milk and meat.
Most people cannot afford much food from animals. Animals require more land for 
the amount of food they provide. A poor family can usually be better nourished if they 
grow or buy plant foods like beans, peas, lentils, and groundnuts together with  
a main food such as maize or rice, rather than buy costly animal foods like meat  
and fish.
However, where family finances and local customs permit, it is wise to eat, when 
possible, some food that comes from animals. This is because even plants high in 
protein (body-building helpers) often do not have all of the different proteins the body 
needs.
Try to eat a variety of plant foods. Different plants supply the body with different 
proteins, vitamins, and minerals. For example, beans and maize together meet the 
body’s needs much better than either beans or maize alone. And if other vegetables 
and fruits are added, this is even better.
Here are some suggestions for getting more vitamins, 
minerals, and proteins at low cost.
1. Breast milk. This is the cheapest, healthiest, and most 
complete food for a baby. The mother can eat plenty of plant 
foods and turn them into the perfect baby food—breast milk. 
Breastfeeding is not only best for the baby, it saves money and 
prevents diseases!
2. Eggs and chicken. In many places eggs are one of the 
cheapest and best forms of animal protein. They can be cooked 
and mixed with foods given to babies who cannot get breast 
milk. Or they can be given along with breast milk as the baby 
grows older.
Eggshells that are boiled, finely ground, and mixed with food 
can provide needed calcium for pregnant women who develop 
sore, loose teeth or muscle cramps.
Chicken is a good, often fairly cheap form of animal 
protein—especially if the family raises its own chickens.
3. Liver, heart, kidney, and blood. These are especially high 
in protein, vitamins, and iron (for anemia) and are often cheaper 
than other meat. Also fish is often cheaper than other meat, and 
is just as nutritious.
People can be strong and healthy
when most of their proteins and other helper foods come from plants.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
117
4. Beans, peas, lentils, and other legumes are a good 
cheap source of protein. If allowed to sprout before cooking 
and eating, they are higher in vitamins. Baby food can be 
made from beans by cooking them well, and then straining 
them through a sieve, or by peeling off their skins, and 
mashing them.
Beans, peas, and other legumes are not only a low-cost 
form of protein. Growing these crops makes the soil richer 
so that other crops will grow better afterwards. For this 
reason, crop rotation and mixed crops are a good idea 
(see p. w13).
5. Dark green leafy vegetables have some iron, a lot of 
vitamin A, and some protein. The leaves of sweet potatoes, 
beans and peas, pumpkins and squash, and baobab are 
especially nutritious. They can be dried, powdered, and 
mixed with babies’ gruel.
Note: Light green vegetables like cabbage and lettuce have less 
nutritional value. It is better to grow ones with dark colored leaves.
6. Cassava (manioc) leaves contain 7 times as much protein 
and more vitamins than the root. If eaten together with the root, 
they add food value—at no additional cost. The young leaves 
are best.
7. Lime soaked maize (corn). When soaked in lime (cal) 
before cooking, as is the custom in much of Latin America, 
maize is richer in calcium. Soaking in lime also allows more 
of the vitamins (niacin) and protein to be used by the body.
8. Rice, wheat, and other grains are more nutritious if their 
outer skins are not removed during milling. Moderately milled rice 
and whole wheat contain more proteins, vitamins, and minerals 
than the white, over milled product.
NOTE: The protein in wheat, rice, maize, and other grains can be better 
used by the body when they are eaten with beans or lentils.
9. Cook vegetables, rice, and other foods in little 
water. And do not overcook. This way fewer vitamins and 
proteins are lost. Be sure to drink the leftover water, or use it 
for soups or in other foods.
10. Many wild fruits and berries are rich in vitamin C 
as well as natural sugars. They provide extra vitamins 
and energy. (Be careful not to eat berries or fruit that are 
poisonous.)
11. Cooking in iron pots or putting a piece of old iron or 
horseshoe in the pan when cooking beans and other foods 
adds iron to food and helps prevent anemia. More iron will be 
available if you also add tomatoes.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
118
For another source of iron, put some iron nails in a little 
lemon juice for a few hours. Then make lemonade with the 
juice and drink it.
12. In some countries, low-cost baby food preparations 
are available, made from different combinations of soybean, 
cotton seed, skim milk, or dried fish. Some taste better than 
others, but most are well balanced foods. When mixed with 
gruel, cooked cereal, or other baby food, they add to its nutrition 
content at low cost.
WHERE TO GET VITAMINS:
IN PILLS, INJECTIONS, SYRUPS—OR IN FOODS?
Anyone who eats a good mixture of foods, including vegetables and fruits, gets all 
the vitamins he needs. It is always better to eat well than to buy vitamin pills, injections, 
syrups, or tonics.
Sometimes nutritious foods are scarce. If a person is already poorly nourished, 
or has a serious illness like HIV, he should eat as well as he can and perhaps take 
vitamins besides.
Vitamins taken by mouth work as well as injections, cost less, and are not as 
dangerous. Do not inject vitamins! It is better to swallow them—preferably in the 
form of nutritious foods.
If you buy vitamin preparations, be sure they have all these vitamins and minerals:
♦  Niacin (niacinamide)
♦  Vitamin B1 (thiamine)
♦  Vitamin B2 (riboflavin)
In addition, certain people need extra:
♦  Folic Acid (folicin), for pregnant 
women
♦  Vitamin A
♦  Vitamin C (ascorbic acid)
♦  Vitamin D
♦  lodine (in areas where 
goiter is common)
If you want vitamins, buy eggs or other
nutritious foods instead of pills or injections.
♦ Iron (ferrous sulfate, etc.)—especially 
for pregnant women.  
(For people with anemia, multi-vitamin 
pills do not have enough iron to help 
much. Iron pills are more helpful.)
♦ Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), for small 
children and persons taking medicine 
for tuberculosis
♦ Calcium, for children and breastfeeding 
mothers who do not get enough calcium 
in foods such as milk, cheese, or foods 
prepared with lime
}
for small 
children
YES
NO
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
119
THINGS TO AVOID IN OUR DIET
A lot of people believe that there are many kinds of foods that will hurt them, or 
that they should not eat when they are sick. They may think of some kinds of foods 
as ‘hot’ and others as ‘cold’, and not permit hot foods for ‘hot’ sicknesses or cold 
foods for ‘cold’ sicknesses. Or they may believe that many different foods are bad 
for a mother with a newborn child. Some of these beliefs are reasonable but others 
do more harm than good. Often the foods people think they should avoid when they 
are sick are the very foods they need to get well.
A sick person has even greater need for plenty of nutritious food than a healthy 
person. We should worry less about foods that might harm a sick person and think 
more about foods that help make him healthy—for example: high energy foods 
together with fruit, vegetables, legumes, nuts, milk, meat, eggs, and fish. As a 
general rule:
The same foods that are good for us when we are healthy 
are good for us when we are sick.
alcoholic drinks
tobacco
a lot of sugar
and sweets
greasy food
too much
coffee
Also, the things that harm us when we are healthy do us even more harm when 
we are sick. Avoid these things:
•  	Alcohol causes or makes worse diseases of the liver, stomach, heart, and nerves. 
It also causes social problems.
•  	Smoking can cause chronic (long-term) coughing or lung cancer and other 
problems (see p. 149). Smoking is especially bad for people with lung diseases 
like tuberculosis, asthma, and bronchitis.
•  	Too much greasy food or coffee can make stomach ulcers and other problems of 
the digestive tract worse.
•  	Too much sugar and sweets spoil the appetite and rot the teeth. However, some 
sugar with other foods may help give needed energy to a sick person or poorly 
nourished child.
A few diseases require not eating certain other foods. For example, people with 
high blood pressure, certain heart problems, or swollen feet should use little or no 
salt. Too much salt is not good for anyone. Stomach ulcers and diabetes also require 
special diets (see p. 127 and 128).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
120
THE BEST DIET FOR SMALL CHILDREN
THE FIRST 6 MONTHS OF LIFE
For the first 6 months give the baby breast milk and nothing 
else. It is better than any baby food or milks you can buy. Breast 
milk helps protect the baby against diarrhea and many infections. It 
is best not to give extra water or teas, even in hot weather.
Some mothers stop breastfeeding early because they think that their milk is not good 
enough for their baby, or that their breasts are not making enough milk. However, a 
mother’s milk is always very nutritious for her baby, even if the mother herself is 
thin and weak.
If a woman has HIV, sometimes she can pass HIV to a baby in her breast milk. 
But if she does not have access to clean water, her baby is more likely to die from 
diarrhea, dehydration, and malnutrition than AIDS. Now medicines can prevent the 
spread of HIV to babies through breast milk (see p. 398). But only you can evaluate the 
conditions in your home and community and decide what to do.
Nearly all mothers can produce all the breast milk their babies need:
♦   The best way for a mother to keep making enough breast milk is to breastfeed 
the baby often, eat well, and drink lots of liquids.
♦   Do not give the baby other foods before he is 6 months old, and always 
breastfeed before giving the other foods.
♦   If a mother’s breasts produce little or no milk, she should continue to eat 
well, drink lots of liquids and let the baby suck her breasts often. After each 
breastfeeding, give the baby, by cup (not bottle), some other type of milk—
like boiled cow’s or goat’s milk, canned milk, or powdered milk. (Do not use 
condensed milk.) Add a little sugar or vegetable oil to any of these milks.
Note: Whatever type of milk is used, some cooled, boiled water should be added. Here 
are two examples of correct formulas:
WARNING: Cornmeal or rice water alone is not enough for a baby. The child 
will not grow well. He will get sick easily and may die. The baby needs a main 
food with added helper foods.
# 1
2 parts boiled, cooled cow’s milk
1 part boiled, cooled water
1 large spoonful sugar or oil for
   each large glass
  # 2
2 parts canned evaporated milk
3 parts boiled, cooled water
1 large spoonful sugar or oil for
   each large glass
If non–fat milk is used, add another spoonful of oil.
♦   If possible, boil the milk and water. It is safer to feed the baby with a cup (or 
cup and spoon) than to use a baby bottle. Baby bottles and nipples are hard 
to keep clean and can cause infections and diarrhea (see p. 154). If a bottle is 
used, boil it and the nipple each time before the baby is fed.
♦   If you cannot buy milk for the child, make a porridge from rice, cornmeal, or other 
cereal. Always add to this some skinned beans, eggs, meat, chicken, or other 
protein. Mash these well and give them as a liquid. If possible add sugar and oil.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
121
FROM 6 MONTHS TO 1 YEAR OF AGE:
1. Keep giving breast milk, if possible until the baby is 2 or 3 years old.
2. When the baby is 6 months old, start giving her other foods in addition 
to breast milk. Always give the breast first, and then the other foods. It is good 
to start with a gruel or porridge made from the main food (p. 111) such as maize 
meal or rice cooked in water or milk. Then start adding a little cooking oil for extra 
energy. After a few days, start adding other helper foods (see p. 110). But start 
with just a little of the new food, and add only 1 at time or the baby may have 
trouble digesting them. These new foods need to be well cooked and mashed. At 
first they can be mixed with a little breast milk to make them easier for the baby to 
swallow.
3. Prepare inexpensive, nutritious feedings for the baby by adding helper 
foods to the main food (see p. 110). Most important is to add foods that give extra 
energy (such as oil) and—whenever possible—extra iron (such as dark green leafy 
vegetables).
Remember, a young child’s stomach is small and cannot hold much food at one 
time. So feed her often, and add high–energy helpers to the main food:
A spoonful of cooking oil added to a child’s food 
means he has to eat only 3/4 as much of the local 
main food in order to meet his energy needs. The 
added oil helps make sure he gets enough energy 
(calories) by the time his belly is full.
CAUTION: The time when a child is most likely to become malnourished is from 
6 months to 2 years old. This is because breast milk by itself does not provide 
enough energy for a baby after 6 months of age. Other foods are needed, but 
often the foods given do not contain enough energy either. If the mother also stops 
breastfeeding, the child is even more likely to become malnourished.
For a child of this age to be healthy we should:
♦   Keep feeding her breast milk 
as much as before.
♦   Feed her other nutritious 
foods also, always starting 
with just a little.
♦   Feed her at least 5 times 
a day and also give her  
snacks between meals. 
♦   Make sure the food is clean  
and freshly prepared.
For mothers infected with HIV: After 6 months, your baby will be bigger and 
stronger, and will have less danger of dying from diarrhea. If you have been 
breastfeeding her, now you should switch to other milks and feed the baby other 
foods. This way the baby will have less risk of getting HIV.
♦   Filter, boil, or purify the 
water she drinks.
♦   Keep the child and her 
surroundings clean.
♦   When she gets sick, 
feed her extra well and 
more often, and give her 
plenty of liquids to drink.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
122
ONE YEAR AND OLDER:
After a child is 1 year old, he can eat the same foods as adults, but should 
continue to breastfeed (or drink milk whenever possible).
Every day, try to give the child plenty of the main food that people eat, together 
with ‘helper’ foods that give added high energy, proteins, vitamins, iron, and minerals 
(as shown on p. 111) so that he will grow up strong and healthy.
To make sure that the child gets enough to eat, serve him in his own dish, and let 
him take as long as he needs to eat his meal.
Children and candy: Do not accustom small children to eating a lot of candy and 
sweets or drinking soft drinks (colas). When they have too many sweets, they no longer 
want enough of the other foods they need. Also, sweets are bad for their teeth.
However, when food supply is limited or when the main foods have a lot of water or 
fiber in them, adding a little sugar and vegetable oil to the main food provides extra 
energy and allows children to make fuller use of the protein in the food they get.
THE BEST DIET FOR SMALL CHILDREN
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
123
HARMFUL IDEAS ABOUT DIET
1. The diet of mothers after giving birth:
In many areas there is a dangerous popular belief that a woman who has just 
had a baby should not eat certain foods. This folk diet—which forbids some of the 
most nutritious foods and may only let the new mother eat things like cornmeal, 
noodles, or rice soup—makes her weak and anemic. It may even cause her death, 
by lowering her resistance to hemorrhage (bleeding) and infection.
After giving birth a mother needs to eat 
the most nutritious foods she can get.
Here is a healthy mother who ate 
many kinds of nutritious foods 
after giving birth:
Here lies a mother who was not given nutritious
foods after giving birth:
In order to fight infections or bleeding and to produce enough milk for her child, 
a new mother should eat the main food together with plenty of body building 
foods like beans, eggs, chicken, and if possible, milk products, meat, and fish. 
She also needs protective foods like fruits and vegetables, and high energy helpers 
(oils and fatty foods). None of these foods will harm her; they will protect her and 
make her stronger.
2. It is not true that oranges, guavas, or other fruits are bad for a person who 
has a cold, the flu, or cough. In fact, fruits like oranges and tomatoes have a lot of 
vitamin C, which may help fight colds and other infections.
3. It is not true that certain foods like pork, spices, or guavas cannot be 
eaten while taking medicine. However, when a person has a disease of the 
stomach or other parts of the digestive system, eating a lot of fat or greasy foods 
may make this worse whether or not one is taking medicines.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
124
Special Diets for Specific Health Problems
Anemia
A person with anemia has thin blood. This happens when blood is lost or destroyed 
faster than the body can replace it. Blood loss from large wounds, bleeding ulcers, 
or dysentery can cause anemia. So can malaria, which destroys red blood cells. Not 
eating enough foods rich in iron can cause anemia or make it worse.
Women can become anemic from blood loss during monthly bleeding (menstrual 
periods) or childbirth if they do not eat the foods their bodies need. Pregnant women 
are at risk of becoming severely anemic, because they need to make extra blood for 
their growing babies.
In children anemia can come from not eating foods rich in iron. It can also come 
from not starting to give some foods in addition to breast milk, after the baby is 6 
months old. Common causes of severe anemia in children are hookworm infection (see 
p. 142), chronic diarrhea, and dysentery.
The signs of anemia are:
•  pale or transparent skin
•  pale insides of eyelids
•  white fingernails
•  pale gums
•  weakness and fatigue
•  If the anemia is very severe, face 
and feet may be swollen, the 
heartbeat rapid, and the person 
may have shortness of breath.
•  Children and women who like to 
eat dirt are usually anemic.
Treatment and prevention of anemia:
♦  Eat foods rich in iron. Meat, fish, and chicken are high in iron. Liver is 
especially high. Dark green leafy vegetables, beans, peas, and lentils also 
have some iron. It also helps to cook in iron pots (see p. 117). To help the body 
absorb more iron, eat raw vegetables and fruit with meals, and avoid drinking 
coffee and tea with food.
♦  If the anemia is moderate or severe, the person should take iron (ferrous sulfate 
pills, p. 392). This is especially important for pregnant women who are anemic. 
For nearly all cases of anemia, ferrous sulfate tablets are much better than liver 
extract or vitamin B12. As a general rule, iron should be given by mouth, not 
injected, because iron injections can be dangerous and are no better than pills.
♦  If the anemia is caused by dysentery (diarrhea with blood), hookworm, malaria, 
or another disease, this should also be treated.
♦  If the anemia is severe or does not get better, seek medical help. This is 
especially important for a pregnant woman.
Many women are anemic. Anemic women run a greater risk of miscarriage and 
of dangerous bleeding in childbirth. It is very important that women eat as much 
of the foods high in iron as possible, especially during pregnancy. Allowing 
2 to 3 years between pregnancies lets the woman regain strength and make new 
blood (see Chapter 20).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
125
Rickets
Children whose skin is almost never 
exposed to the sunlight may become 
bowlegged and develop other bone 
deformities (rickets). This problem can be 
combatted by giving the child fortified milk 
and vitamin D (found in fish liver oil). However, 
the easiest and cheapest form of prevention 
is to be sure direct sunlight reaches the 
child’s skin for at least 10 minutes a day or for 
longer periods more often. (Be careful  
not to let his skin burn.) Never give large 
doses of vitamin D over long periods,  
as it can poison the child.
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension) 
High blood pressure can cause many problems, such as heart disease, kidney 
disease, and stroke. Fat people are especially likely to have high blood pressure.
Signs of dangerously high blood pressure:
•  frequent headaches
•  pounding of the heart and shortness of 
breath with mild exercise
•  weakness and dizziness
•  occasional pain in the left shoulder and chest
All these problems may also be caused by 
other diseases. Therefore, if a person suspects he 
has high blood pressure, he should see a health 
worker and have his blood pressure measured.
WARNING: High blood pressure at first causes no signs, 
and it should be lowered before danger signs develop. People who are 
overweight or suspect they might have high blood pressure should have their 
blood pressure checked regularly. For instructions on measuring blood pressure, 
see p. 410 and 411.
What to do to prevent or care for high blood pressure:
♦	
If overweight, lose weight (see next page).
♦	
Avoid fatty foods, especially pig fat, and foods with a lot of sugar or starch. 
Always use vegetable oil instead of pig fat.
♦	
Prepare and eat food with little or no salt.
♦	
Do not smoke. Do not drink much alcohol.
♦	
When the blood pressure is very high, the health worker may give medicines 
to lower it. Many people can lower their blood pressure by losing weight if 
they are fat (next page), and by learning to relax.
A BLOOD 
PRESSURE CUFF 
for measuring
blood pressure
bony 
necklace
curved 
bones
big joints
bowed legs
SUNLIGHT IS THE BEST PREVENTION 
AND TREATMENT OF RICKETS.
Signs of rickets:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
126
People who are too Heavy
To be very fat is not healthy. Very heavy people are 
more likely to get high blood pressure, stroke, gallstones, 
some kinds of diabetes, arthritis in legs and feet, and other 
problems. Sometimes being too heavy brings on illness, 
and sometimes illness may cause you to become too heavy.
As our diets change and traditional foods are replaced 
by processed foods, especially “junk foods” high in calories 
but low in nutrition, people tend to gain weight in ways that 
are not healthy.
Losing weight may help with the illnesses mentioned 
above. Losing weight is also important if you are having 
difficulty doing your daily activities. You can lose weight by:
♦  eating less greasy, fatty, or oily foods.
♦  eating less sugar or sweet foods.
♦  getting more exercise.
♦  stop eating processed foods and eat 
fresh fruits and vegetables instead.
Constipation
A person who has hard stools and has not had a bowel movement for 3 or more 
days is said to be constipated. Constipation is often caused by a poor diet (especially 
not eating enough fruits, green vegetables, or foods with natural fiber like whole grain 
bread) or by lack of exercise.
Drinking more water and eating more fruits, vegetables, and foods with natural 
fiber like whole grain bread, cassava, wheat bran, rye, carrots, turnips, raisins, nuts, 
pumpkin or sunflower seeds, is better than using laxatives. It also helps to add a little 
vegetable oil to food each day. Older people especially may need to walk or exercise 
more in order to have regular bowel movements.
A person who has not had a bowel movement for 4 or more days, if he does not 
have a sharp pain in his stomach, can take a mild salt laxative like milk of magnesia. 
But do not take laxatives often.
Do not give laxatives to babies or young children. If a baby is severely constipated, 
put a little cooking oil up the rectum (asshole). Or, if necessary, gently break up and 
remove the hard shit with a greased finger.
Never use strong laxatives or purgatives—
especially if there is stomach pain.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
127
Diabetes
Persons with diabetes have too much sugar in their blood. This can start when 
a person is young (juvenile diabetes) or older (adult diabetes). It is usually more 
serious in young people, and they need special medicine (insulin) to control it. But it 
is most common in people over age 40 who eat too much and get fat.
Early signs of diabetes:	 	
      	
Later, more serious signs:
•  always thirsty	
•  itchy skin
•  urinates (pees) often and a lot	
•  periods of blurry eyesight
•  always tired	
•  some loss of feeling in hands or feet
•  always hungry	
•  frequent vaginal infections
•  weight loss	
•  sores on the feet that do not heal
	
•  loss of consciousness (in extreme	 	
	
    cases)
All these signs may be caused by other diseases. In order to find out whether a 
person has diabetes, test her urine to see if there is sugar in it. One way to test the 
urine is to taste it. If it tastes sweet to you, have 2 other persons taste it. Have them 
also taste the urine of 3 other people. If everyone agrees that the same person’s 
urine is sweeter, she is probably diabetic.
Another way of testing urine is to use special paper strips (for example, Uristix). If 
these change color when dipped in the urine, it has sugar in it.
If the person is a child or young adult, he should be seen by an experienced 
health worker or doctor.
When a person gets diabetes after he is 40 years old, it can often be best 
controlled without medicines, by eating correctly. The diabetic person’s diet is 
very important and must be followed carefully for life.
The diabetic diet: Fat people with diabetes should lose weight until their weight is 
normal. Diabetics must not eat any sugar or sweets, or foods that taste sweet. It 
is important for them to eat lots of high fiber foods, such as whole grain breads. But 
diabetics should also eat some other starchy foods, like beans, rice, and potatoes, 
and also foods high in protein.
Diabetes in adults can sometimes be helped by drinking the sap of the prickly 
pear cactus (nopal, Opuntia). To prepare, cut the cactus into small pieces and crush 
them to squeeze out the liquid. Drink 1 ½ cups of the liquid 3 times each day before 
meals.
To prevent infection and injury to the skin, clean the teeth after eating, keep 
the skin clean, and always wear shoes to prevent foot injuries. For poor circulation 
in the feet (dark color, numbness), rest often with the feet up. Follow the same 
recommendations as for varicose veins (p. 175).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
128
Acid Indigestion, Heartburn, and Stomach Ulcers
Acid indigestion and ‘heartburn’ often come from eating too much heavy or greasy 
food or from drinking too much alcohol or coffee. These make the stomach produce 
extra acid, which causes discomfort or a ‘burning’ feeling in the stomach or mid chest. 
Some people mistake the chest pain, called ‘heartburn’, for a heart problem rather than 
indigestion. If the pain gets worse when lying down, it is probably heartburn.
Frequent or lasting acid indigestion is a warning sign of an ulcer.
An ulcer is a chronic sore in the digestive 
system, usually caused by bacteria. Too much 
acid in the stomach prevents it from healing. 
It may cause a chronic, dull (sometimes sharp) 
pain in the pit of the stomach. As with acid 
indigestion, often the pain lessens when the 
person eats food or drinks a lot of water. The 
pain usually gets worse an hour or more after 
eating, if the person misses a meal, or after 
he drinks alcohol or eats fatty or spicy foods. 
Pain is often worse at night. Without a special 
examination (endoscopy) it is often hard to know 
whether a person with frequent stomach pain 
has an ulcer or not.
If the ulcer is severe, it can cause vomiting, sometimes with fresh blood, or with 
digested blood that looks like coffee grounds. Stools with blood from an ulcer are 
usually black, like tar.
WARNING: Some ulcers are painless or ‘silent’, and the first sign is blood in vomit, or 
black, sticky stools. This is a medical emergency. The person can quickly bleed to 
death. GET MEDICAL HELP FAST.
Prevention and Treatment:
Whether stomach or chest pain is caused by heartburn, acid indigestion, or an ulcer, 
a few basic recommendations will probably help calm the pain and prevent it from 
coming back.
♦  Do not eat too much. Eat small meals and eat frequent snacks between meals. 
♦  Notice what foods or drinks make the pain worse and avoid them. 
These usually include alcoholic drinks, coffee, 
spices, pepper, carbonated drinks (soda, pop, 
colas), and fatty or greasy foods.
♦  If the heartburn is worse at night when 
lying flat, try sleeping with the upper body 
somewhat raised.
An ulcer is an 
open sore in the 
stomach or gut.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
129
♦  Drink a lot of water. Try to drink 2 big glasses of 
water both before and after each meal. Also drink a lot 
of water frequently between meals. If the pain comes 
often, keep drinking water like this, even in those times 
when you have no pain.
♦  Avoid tobacco. Smoking or chewing tobacco 
increases stomach acid and makes the problem 
worse.
♦  Take antacids. The best, safest antacids contain magnesium and aluminum 
hydroxide. (See p. 380 for information, dose, and warnings about different antacids.)
♦  If the above treatments do not work, you may have an ulcer. Use 2 medicines 
to treat the bacteria that causes the ulcer: either amoxicillin (p. 352) or tetracycline 
(p. 355); and metronidazole (p. 368). Also take omeprazole (Prilosec, p. 381) or 
ranitidine (Zantac, see p. 381) to reduce the production 
of acid in the stomach. These medicines help to calm the 
pain and heal the sore.
♦  Aloe vera is a plant found in many countries that 
is said to heal ulcers. Chop the spongy leaves into small 
pieces, soak them in water overnight, and then drink one 
glass of the slimy, bitter water every 2 hours.
CAUTION:
1. Some antacids, some antacids such as sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) 
and Alka-Seltzer may quickly calm acid indigestion, but soon cause more acid. They 
should be used only for occasional indigestion, never for ulcers. This is also true for 
antacids with calcium.
2. Some medicines, such as aspirin and ibuprofen, make ulcers worse. Persons 
with signs of heartburn or acid indigestion should avoid them—use acetaminophen 
instead of aspirin. Cortico-steroids also make ulcers worse (see p. 51).
It is important to treat an ulcer early. Otherwise it may lead to dangerous 
bleeding or peritonitis. Ulcers sometimes get better if the person is careful with what 
he eats and drinks. Anger, tension, and nervousness increase acid in the stomach. 
Learning to relax and keep calm will help. Treatment with antibiotics is necessary to 
prevent the ulcer from returning.
Avoid having minor stomach problems get worse by not eating too much, by 
not drinking much alcohol or coffee, and by not smoking or using tobacco.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
130
Goiter (a Swelling or Lump on the Throat)
A goiter is a swelling or big lump on the throat that results from abnormal growth of a 
gland called the thyroid.
Most goiters are caused by a lack of iodine in the diet. Also, a lack of iodine in a 
pregnant woman’s diet sometimes causes babies to die or to be born mentally slow 
and/or deaf (cretinism, p. 318). This can happen even though the mother does not have 
a goiter.
Goiter and cretinism are most common in mountain areas where there is little 
natural iodine in the soil, water, or food. In these areas, eating a lot of certain foods like 
cassava makes it more likely for a person to get a goiter.
How to prevent or cure a goiter and prevent cretinism:
Everyone living in areas where people get goiters should use iodized salt. Use of 
iodized salt prevents the common kind of goiter and will help many goiters go away. 
(Old, hard goiters can only be removed by surgery, but this is usually not necessary.)
If it is not possible to get iodized salt, it may be possible to get iodine oil to take by 
mouth or injection. Or, mix 1 drop of povidone iodine in 1 liter of water and drink a glass 
of the mixture every week.
Most home cures for goiter do not do any good. However, eating crab and other 
seafood can do some good because they contain iodine. Mixing a little seaweed with 
food also adds iodine. But the easiest way is to use iodized salt.
HOW TO KEEP FROM GETTING A GOITER
   NEVER use regular salt.	                        	
	
               ALWAYS use iodized salt.
IODIZED SALT
costs only a little more
than other salt and
is much better.
Also, if you live in an area where goiters are common, or you are beginning to 
develop a goiter, try to avoid eating much cassava or cabbage.
Note: If a person with a goiter trembles a lot, is very nervous, and has eyes that bulge 
out, this may be a different kind of goiter (toxic goiter). Seek medical advice.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
131
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure! If we all took more care to eat 
well, to keep ourselves, our homes, and our villages clean, and to be sure that 
our children are vaccinated, we could stop most sicknesses before they start. 
In Chapter 11 we discussed eating well. In this chapter we talk about cleanliness 
and vaccination.
CLEANLINESS—AND PROBLEMS
THAT COME FROM LACK OF CLEANLINESS
Cleanliness is of great importance in the prevention of many kinds of infections—
infections of the gut, the skin, the eyes, the lungs, and the whole body. Personal 
cleanliness (or hygiene) and public cleanliness (or sanitation) are both important.
Many common infections of the gut are spread from one person to another 
because of poor hygiene and poor sanitation. Germs and worms (or their eggs) 
are passed by the thousands in the stools or feces (shit) of infected persons. These 
are carried from the feces of one person to the mouth of another by dirty fingers or 
contaminated food or water. Diseases that are spread or transmitted from feces-to-
mouth in this way, include:
•	 diarrhea and dysentery (caused by amebas and bacteria)
•	 intestinal worms (several types)
•	 hepatitis, typhoid fever, and cholera
•	 certain other diseases, like polio, are sometimes spread this same way
The way these infections are 
transmitted can be very direct.
For example: A child who has worms 
and who forgot to wash his hands after 
his last bowel movement, offers his friend 
a cracker. His fingers, still dirty with his 
own stool, are covered with hundreds of 
tiny worm eggs (so small they cannot be 
seen). Some of these worm eggs stick 
to the cracker. When his friend eats the 
cracker, he swallows the worm eggs, too.
Soon the friend will also have worms. 
His mother may say this is because he ate 
sweets. But no, it is because he ate shit!
CHAPTER
12
Prevention: How to
Avoid Many Sicknesses
132
Many times pigs, dogs, chickens, and other animals spread intestinal disease and 
worm eggs. For example:
A man with diarrhea
or worms has a bowel
movement behind his
house.
A pig eats his stool,
dirtying its nose and
feet.
Then the pig goes into
the house.
In the house a child is playing on the floor. In 
this way, a bit of the man’s stool gets on the 
child, too.
Later the child 
starts to cry, and the 
mother takes
him in her
arms.
The family eats the food.
Then the mother prepares
food, forgetting to wash her
hands after handling the
child.
And soon, the whole family has
diarrhea or worms.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
133
Many kinds of infections, as well as worm eggs, are passed from one person to 
another in the way just shown.
If the family had taken any of the following precautions, the spread of the 
sickness could have been prevented:
•	 if the man had used a latrine or out-house,
•	 if the family had not let the pigs come into the house,
•	 if they had not let the child play where the pig had been,
•	 if the mother had washed her hands after touching the child and before 
preparing food.
If there are many cases of diarrhea, worms, and other intestinal parasites in 
your village, people are not being careful enough about cleanliness. If many 
children die from diarrhea, it is likely that poor nutrition is also part of the problem. 
To prevent death from diarrhea, both cleanliness and good nutrition are 
important (see p. 154 and Chapter 11).
BASIC GUIDELINES OF CLEANLINESS
Personal Cleanliness (Hygiene)
1.	 Always wash your hands 
with soap when you 
get up in the morning, 
after having a bowel 
movement, and before 
cooking or eating.
4.	 Brush your teeth every day and after each 
time you eat sweets. If you do not have a 
toothbrush and toothpaste, rub your teeth 
with salt and baking soda (see p. 230). For 
more information about the care of teeth, 
see Chapter 17.
3.	 In areas where hookworm is common, do not go 
barefoot or allow children to do so. Hookworm 
infection causes severe anemia. These worms enter 
the body through the soles of the feet (see p. 142).
2.	 Bathe often every day when the weather is hot. Bathe 
after working hard or sweating. Frequent bathing helps 
prevent skin infections, dandruff, pimples, itching, and 
rashes. Sick persons, including babies, should be 
bathed daily.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
134
Cleanliness in the Home
1. Do not let pigs or other animals come into 
the house or places where children play.
2. Do not let dogs lick children or 
climb up on beds. Dogs, too, can 
spread disease.
3. If children or animals have a 
bowel movement near the house, 
clean it up at once. Teach children to 
use a latrine or at least to go farther 
from the house.
4. Hang or spread sheets and blankets in the sun often. 
If there are bedbugs, pour boiling water on the cots 
and wash the sheets and blankets—all on the same 
day (see p. 200).
5. De-louse the whole family often (see p. 200). Lice and fleas 
carry many diseases. Dogs and other animals that carry fleas 
should not come into the house.
6. Do not spit on the floor. Spit can spread 
disease. When you cough or sneeze, 
cover your mouth with your hand or a 
cloth or handkerchief.
7. Clean house often. Sweep and wash the floors, walls, and beneath furniture. Fill in 
cracks and holes in the floor or walls where roaches, bedbugs, and scorpions can hide.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
135
4. Only eat meat and fish  
that is well cooked. Be  
careful that roasted meat, 
especially pork and fish, do  
not have raw parts inside. Raw 
pork carries dangerous diseases.
5. Chickens carry germs that can cause diarrhea. Wash your hands after preparing 
chicken before you touch other foods.
6. Do not eat food that is old or smells bad. It may be poisonous. 
Do not eat canned food if the can is swollen or squirts when 
opened. Be especially careful with canned fish. Also, be careful 
with chicken that has passed several hours since it was cooked. 
Before eating left-over cooked foods, heat them again, very hot. 
If possible, give only foods that have been freshly prepared, 
especially to children, elderly people, and very sick people.
7. People with tuberculosis, flu, colds, or other 
diseases that spread easily should eat separately 
from others. Plates and utensils used by sick 
people should be cleaned very well before being 
used by others.
Cleanliness in Eating and Drinking
1. Ideally, all water that does not come from a pure water system should be boiled, 
filtered, or purified before drinking. This is especially important for small children, 
people with HIV, and times when there is a lot of diarrhea or cases of typhoid, 
hepatitis, or cholera. However, to prevent disease, having enough water is more 
important than having pure water. Also, asking poor families to use a lot of time or 
money for fire wood to boil drinking water may do more harm than good, especially 
if it means less food for the children or more destruction 
of forests. For more information on clean water, see  
A Community Guide to Environmental Health, Chapter 5.
A good, low-cost way to purify water is to put it in a 
clean, clear bottle or a clear plastic bag and leave it in 
direct sunlight for at least 6 hours. If it is cloudy, leave 
the water exposed to sun for at least 2 days. This 
method will kill most germs in the water.
2. Do not let flies and other insects land or crawl on food. 
These insects carry germs and spread disease. Do not leave 
food scraps or dirty dishes lying around, as these attract flies 
and breed germs. Protect food by keeping it covered or in 
boxes or cabinets with wire screens.
3. Before eating fruit that has fallen to the ground, wash it 
well. Do not let children pick up and eat food that has been 
dropped—wash it first.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
136
3. Bathe children, change their clothes, and cut their 
fingernails often. Germs and worm eggs often hide 
beneath long fingernails.
4. Treat children who have infectious 
diseases as soon as possible, so that the 
diseases are not spread to others.
5. Follow all the guidelines of cleanliness  
mentioned in this chapter. Teach children to follow these 
guidelines and explain why 
they are important. Encourage 
children to help with projects that make the home or village 
a healthier place to live.
6. Be sure children get enough good food. Good 
nutrition helps protect the body against many infections. A 
well-nourished child will usually resist or fight off infections 
that can kill a poorly nourished child (read Chapter 11).
How to Protect Your Children’s Health
1. A sick child like this one
should sleep apart from
children who are well.
Sick children or children with sores, itchy skin, or lice should always sleep 
separately from those who are well. Children with infectious diseases like whooping 
cough, measles, or the common cold should sleep in separate rooms, if possible, and 
should not be allowed near babies or small children.
2. Protect children from tuberculosis. People with long-term 
coughing or other signs of tuberculosis should cover their 
mouths whenever they cough. They should never sleep 
in the same room with children. They should see a health 
worker and be treated as soon as possible.
Children living with a person who has tuberculosis 
should be vaccinated against TB (B.C.G. Vaccine).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
137
Public Cleanliness (Sanitation)
1. Keep wells and public water holes clean. Do not let animals go near where 
people get drinking water. If necessary, put a fence around the place to keep 
animals out.
Do not defecate (shit) or throw garbage near the water hole. Take special care  
to keep rivers and streams clean upstream from any place where drinking water  
is taken.
2. Burn all garbage that can be burned. Garbage that cannot be burned should 
be buried in a special pit or place far away from houses and the places where 
people get drinking water.
3. Build latrines (out-houses, toilets) so pigs and other animals cannot reach the 
human waste. A deep hole with a little house over it works well. The deeper the hole, 
the less problem there is with flies and smell.
Here is a drawing of a simple 
out-house that is easy to 
build.
It helps to throw a little lime, 
dirt, or ashes in the hole after 
each use to reduce the smell 
and keep flies away.
Out-houses should be built at 
least 20 meters from homes 
or the source of water.
If you do not have an 
out‑house, go far away from 
where people bathe or get 
drinking water. Teach your 
children to do the same.
Ideas for better latrines are found on the next 
pages. Also latrines can be built to produce good 
fertilizer for gardens. See A Community Guide to 
Environmental Health, Chapter 7.
Use of latrines helps
prevent many sicknesses.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
138
BETTER LATRINES
The latrine or out-house shown on the previous page is very simple and costs almost 
nothing to make. But it is open at the top and lets in flies.
Closed latrines are better because the flies stay out and the smell stays in. A closed 
latrine has a platform or slab with a hole in it and a lid over the hole. The slab can be 
made of wood or cement. Cement is better because the slab fits more tightly and will 
not rot.
One way to make a cement slab:
1. Dig a shallow pit, about 1 meter square 
and 7 cm. deep. Be sure the bottom of the pit is 
level and smooth.
2. Make or cut a wire mesh or grid 1 meter 
square. The wires can be ¼ to ½ cm. thick and 
about 10 cm. apart. Cut a hole about 25 cm. 
across in the middle of the grid.
3. Put the grid in the pit. Bend the ends of the 
wires, or put a small stone at each corner, so that 
the grid stands about 3 cm. off the ground.
4. Put an old bucket in the hole in the grid.
5. Mix cement with sand, gravel, and water 
and pour it until it is about 5 cm. thick. (With 
each shovel of cement mix 2 shovels of sand 
and 3 shovels of gravel.)
6. Remove the bucket when the cement is 
beginning to get hard (about 3 hours). Then 
cover the cement with damp cloths, sand, hay, 
or a sheet of plastic and keep it wet. Remove the 
slab after 3 days.
If you prefer to sit when you use the 
latrine, make a cement seat like this:  
Make a mold, or you can use 2 buckets 
of different sizes, one inside the other.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
139
To make the closed latrine, the slab should be placed over a round hole in the 
ground. Dig the hole a little less than 1 meter across and between 1 and 2 meters 
deep. To be safe, the latrine should be at least 20 meters from all houses, wells, 
springs, rivers or streams. If it is anywhere near where people go for water, be sure 
to put the latrine downstream.
Keep
door 
closed.
Keep your latrine clean. Wash the slab often. Be sure 
the hole in the slab has a cover and that the cover is 
kept in place. A simple cover can be made of wood.
THE FLY-TRAPPING VIP LATRINE
To make the ventilated improved pit (VIP) 
latrine, make a larger slab (2 meters square) 
with 2 holes in it. Over one hole put a ventilation 
pipe, covered with fly screen (wire screen lasts 
longer). Over the other hole build an out house, 
which must be kept dark inside. Leave this hole 
uncovered.
This latrine helps get rid of odors and flies: 
smells escape through the pipe, and flies get 
trapped there and die!
CLOSED LATRINE:
fly 
screen
vent 
pipe
flies and 
odors
more than 
20 m.
more than 
20 m.
more than 
20 m.
more than 
20 m.
1 - 2 m.
1 ½ m.
3 m.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
140
The only worms commonly seen in the stools are roundworms, pinworms, and 
tapeworms. Hookworms and whipworms may be present in the gut in large numbers 
without ever being seen in the stools.
Note on worm medicines: Many ‘worm medicines’ contain piperazine. These work 
only for roundworms and pinworms and should not be given to babies and small 
children. Mebendazole (Vermox) is safer and attacks many more kinds of worms. 
Albendazole and pyrantel also work for many kinds of worms, but they may be 
expensive. Thiabendazole attacks many kinds of worms, but causes dangerous side 
effects and should usually not be used. See pages 373 to 375 for more information on 
all these medicines.
Roundworm (Ascaris)
20 to 30 cm. long. Color: pink or white
How they are spread:
Feces-to-mouth. Through lack of cleanliness, the roundworm eggs pass from one 
person’s stools to another person’s mouth.
Effect on health:
Once the eggs are swallowed, young worms hatch and enter the bloodstream; 
this may cause general itching. The young worms then travel to the lungs, sometimes 
causing a dry cough or at worst, pneumonia with coughing of blood. The young worms 
are coughed up, swallowed, and reach the intestines, where they grow to full size.
Many roundworms in the intestines may cause discomfort, indigestion, and 
weakness. Children with many roundworms often have very large, swollen bellies. 
Rarely, roundworms may cause asthma, or a dangerous obstruction or blockage in the 
gut (see p. 94). Especially when the child has a fever, the worms sometimes come out 
in the stools or crawl out through the mouth or nose. Occasionally they crawl into the 
airway and cause gagging.
WORMS AND OTHER INTESTINAL PARASITES
There are many types of worms and other tiny animals (parasites) that live in 
people’s intestines and cause diseases. Those which are larger are sometimes seen in 
the stools (feces, shit):
1. ROUNDWORM (Ascaris)
2. Pinworm 
(threadworm)
4. HOOKWORM
5. TAPEWORM
3. whipworm 
(Trichuris)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
141
Prevention:
Use latrines, wash hands before eating or handling food, protect food from flies, 
and follow the guidelines of cleanliness described in the first part of this chapter.
Treatment:
Mebendazole will usually get rid of roundworms. For dosage see p. 373. 
Piperazine also works (see p. 374). Some home remedies work fairly well. For a home 
remedy using papaya see page 13.
WARNING: Do not use thiabendazole for roundworms. It often makes the worms 
move up to the nose or mouth and can cause gagging.
Pinworm, Threadworm, Seatworm (Enterobious)
1 cm. long. Color: white. Very thin and threadlike.
How they are transmitted:
These worms lay thousands of eggs just outside the anus 
(ass hole). This causes itching, especially at night. When a 
child scratches, the eggs stick under his nails, and are carried 
to food and other objects. In this way they reach his own mouth 
or the mouths of others, causing new infections of pinworms.
Effect on health:
These worms are not dangerous. Itching may disturb the 
child’s sleep.
Treatment and Prevention:
♦	 A child who has pinworms should wear tight diapers or 
pants while sleeping to keep him from scratching his anus.
♦	 Wash the child’s hands and buttocks (anal area) when he 
wakes up and after he has a bowel movement. Always wash his hands before 
he eats.
♦	 Cut his fingernails very short.
♦	 Change his clothes and bathe him often—wash the buttocks and nails 
especially well.
♦	 Put Vaseline in and around his anus at bedtime to help stop itching.
♦	 Give mebendazole worm medicine. For dosage, see page 373. Piperazine 
also works, but should not be used for babies (see p. 374). When one child is 
treated for these worms, it is wise to treat the whole family at the same time. 
For a home remedy using garlic, see page 12.
♦	 Cleanliness is the best prevention for threadworms. Even if medicine gets rid 
of the worms, they will be picked up again if care is not taken with personal 
hygiene. Pinworms only live for about 6 weeks. By carefully following the 
guidelines of cleanliness, most of the worms will be gone within a few 
weeks, even without medicine.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
142
Whipworm (Trichuris, Trichocephalus)
3 to 5 cm. long. Color: pink or gray.
This worm, like the roundworm, is passed from the feces of one person to the mouth 
of another person. Usually this worm does little harm, but it may cause diarrhea. In 
children it occasionally causes part of the intestines to come out of the anus (prolapse 
of the rectum).
Prevention: The same as for roundworm.
Treatment: If the worms cause a problem, give mebendazole. For dosage, see 
page 374. For prolapse of the rectum, turn the child upside down and pour cool water 
on the intestine. This should make it pull back in.
Hookworm
1 cm. long. Color: red.
Hookworms cannot usually be seen in the feces. A stool analysis is needed to 
prove that they are there.
How hookworms are spread:
Hookworm infection can be one of the most damaging diseases of childhood. Any 
child who is anemic, very pale, or eats dirt may have hookworms. If possible, his stools 
should be analyzed.
Treatment: Use mebendazole, albendazole, or pyrantel. For dosage and precautions, 
see pages 373 to 375. Treat anemia by eating foods rich in iron and if necessary by 
taking iron pills (p. 124).
Prevent hookworm: Build and use latrines.
Do not let children go barefoot.
3. The person coughs up the young 
worms and swallows them.
4. A few days later the person may 
have diarrhea or a stomach-ache.
2. In a few days they reach the 
lungs through the blood stream. 
They may cause a dry cough 
(rarely with blood).
5. The hookworms attach 
themselves to the walls of the gut. 
Many worms can cause weakness 
and severe anemia.
1. The baby hookworms enter 
a person’s bare feet. This can 
cause red marks on the feet 
and itching.
6. The hookworm eggs leave the body 
in the person’s stools. The eggs hatch 
on moist soil.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
143
Tapeworm
In the intestines tapeworms grow several meters 
long. But the small, flat, white pieces 
(segments) found in the feces 
are usually about 1 cm. 
long. Occasionally a 
segment may crawl out by 
itself and be found in the 
underclothing.
People get tapeworms 
from eating pork (pig meat), 
beef (cow meat) or other meat or 
fish that is not well cooked.
Prevention: Be careful that all meat is well cooked, especially pork. Make sure 
no parts in the center of roasted meat or cooked fish are still raw.
The worm eggs 
the pig has 
eaten form cysts 
in the meat.
When a person eats poorly cooked 
meat, the cysts become tapeworms 
in his intestines.
The pig eats the eggs
in the man’s stools.
The cysts may cause 
headaches, seizures, 
or death.
Eggs that enter the person’s 
mouth from his feces, through 
lack of cleanliness, can form
cysts in his brain.
adult 
tape
worm
segments
eggs
cysts
egg
cyst
adult 
tapeworm
segments
Effect on health: Tapeworms in the intestines sometimes cause mild stomach 
aches, but few other problems.
The greatest danger exists when the cysts (small sacs containing baby worms) 
get into a person’s brain. This happens when the eggs pass from his stools to his 
mouth. For this reason, anyone with tapeworms must follow the guidelines of 
cleanliness carefully—and get treatment as soon as possible.
Treatment: Take niclosamide (Yomesan, p. 375), or praziquantel (p. 375). Follow 
instructions carefully. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
144
Trichinosis
These worms are never seen in the stools. They burrow through the person’s 
intestines and get into her muscles. People get these worms, like tapeworms, from 
eating infected pork or other meat that is not well cooked.
Effect on health: Depending on the amount of infected meat eaten, the person may 
feel no effects, or she may become very sick or die. From a few hours to 5 days 
after eating the infected pork, the person may develop diarrhea and feel sick to her 
stomach.
In serious cases the person may have:
•	 fever with chills
•	 muscle pain
•	 swelling around the eyes and 
sometimes swelling of the feet
Severe cases may last 3 or 4 weeks.
Treatment: Seek medical help at once. Albendazole or mebendazole may help. For 
dosages, see p. 373 and 374. (Cortico-steroids may help, but should be given by a 
health worker or doctor.)
Important: If several people who ate meat from the same pig get sick afterward, 
suspect trichinosis. This can be dangerous; seek medical attention.
Prevention of trichinosis:
♦	 Only eat pork and other meat that has been well cooked.
♦	 Do not feed scraps of meat or leftovers from butchering to pigs unless the meat 
has first been cooked.
Amebas
These are not worms, but tiny animals—or parasites—that 
can be seen only with a microscope (an instrument that makes 
things look much bigger).
How they are transmitted:
The stools of infected people contain millions of these tiny 
parasites. Because of poor sanitation, they get into the source of 
drinking water or into food, and other people become infected.
Signs of infection with amebas:
Many healthy people have amebas without becoming sick. However, amebas are 
a common cause of severe diarrhea or dysentery (diarrhea with blood)—especially 
in persons already weakened by other sickness or poor nutrition. Less commonly, 
amebas cause painful, dangerous abscesses in the liver.
•	 small bruises (black or blue spots) on 
the skin
•	 bleeding in the whites of the eyes
Ameba as seen
under a microscope
Microscope
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
145
Typical amebic dysentery consists of:
•	 diarrhea that comes and goes—sometimes alternating with constipation
•	 cramps in the belly and a need to have frequent bowel movements, even 
when little or nothing—or just mucus—comes out
•	 many loose (but usually not watery) stools with lots of mucus, sometimes 
stained with blood
•	 in severe cases, much blood; the person may be very weak and ill
•	 if there is fever, it means there may also be a bacterial infection
Diarrhea with blood may be caused by either amebas or bacteria. However, 
bacterial dysentery (Shigella) begins more suddenly, the stools are more watery, and 
there is almost always fever (p. 158). As a general rule:
Diarrhea + blood + fever = bacterial infection (Shigella)
Diarrhea + blood + no fever = amebas
Giardia as 
seen under a 
microscope
Occasionally bloody diarrhea has other causes. To be sure of the cause, a stool 
analysis may be necessary.
Sometimes amebas get into the liver and form an abscess or pocket of pus. This 
causes tenderness or pain in the right upper belly. Pain may extend into the right 
chest and is worse when the person walks. (Compare this with gallbladder pain, 
p. 329; hepatitis, p. 172; and cirrhosis, p. 328.) If the person with these signs begins 
to cough up a brown liquid, an amebic abscess is draining into his lung.
Treatment:
♦	 If possible get medical help and a stool analysis.
♦	 Amebic dysentery can be treated with metronidazole, if possible followed 
by diloxanide furoate. For dosage, length of treatment, and precautions, see 
p. 368.
♦	 For amebic abscess, treat as for amebic dysentery. Be sure to take both 
metronidazole and diloxanide furoate (p. 368).
Prevention: Make and use latrines, protect the source of drinking water, and follow 
the guidelines of cleanliness. Eating well and avoiding fatigue and drunkenness are 
also important in preventing amebic dysentery.
Giardia
The giardia, like the ameba, is a microscopic parasite that lives 
in the gut and is a common cause of diarrhea, especially in children. 
The diarrhea may be chronic or intermittent (may come and go).
A person who has yellow, bad-smelling diarrhea that is frothy 
(full of bubbles) but without blood or mucus, probably has giardia. 
The belly is swollen with gas and uncomfortable, there are mild 
intestinal cramps, and the person farts and burps a lot. The burps 
have a bad taste, like sulfur. There is usually no fever.
Giardia infections sometimes clear up by themselves. Good nutrition helps. 
Severe cases are best treated with metronidazole (see p. 368). Quinacrine (Atabrine, 
p. 369) is cheaper and often works well, but causes worse side effects.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
146
BLOOD FLUKES (SCHISTOSOMIASIS, BILHARZIA)
This infection is caused by a kind of worm that gets into the bloodstream. Different 
types of blood flukes are found in different parts of the world. One kind, common in 
Africa and the Middle East, causes blood in the urine. Other types, which cause bloody 
diarrhea, occur in Africa, South America, and Asia. In areas where these diseases are 
known to occur, any person who has blood in his urine or stools should have a 
sample of it tested for fluke eggs.
Signs:
•	 The most common sign is blood in the urine (especially when passing the last 
drops)—or, for other kinds of flukes, bloody diarrhea.
•	 Pain may occur in the lower belly and between the legs; it is usually worst at the end 
of urinating. Low fever, weakness, and itching may occur. In women, there may be 
sores that look like a sexually transmitted infection.
•	 After months or years, the kidneys, liver or spleen may be damaged or enlarged, 
which can cause pain and eventually even death.
•	 Sometimes there are no early signs. In areas where schistosomiasis is very common, 
persons with only mild signs or belly pain should be tested.
Treatment:
See a health worker. Praziquantel works for all types of blood flukes.  
Metrifonate and oxamniquine work for some kinds of blood flukes. 
For dosages see p. 376.
Prevention:
Blood flukes are not spread directly from person to person. Part 
of their life they must live inside a certain kind of small water snail.
Blood flukes spread like this:
1. Infected person
urinates or defecates
in water.
2. Urine or feces has
worm eggs in it.
5. In this way, someone who washes or 
swims in water where an infected person 
has urinated or defecated also becomes 
infected.
3. Worm eggs hatch 
and go into snails.
4. Young worms 
leave snail and go 
into another person.
SNAIL,
REAL SIZE
To prevent schistosomiasis, cooperate with programs to kill snails and treat infected 
persons. But most important: Everyone should learn to use latrines and NEVER 
URINATE OR DEFECATE IN OR NEAR WATER.
For information on guinea worm, which is also spread in water, see p. 406 and 407.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
147
VACCINATIONS (IMMUNIZATIONS)—SIMPLE, SURE PROTECTION
Vaccines protect against many dangerous diseases. Each country has a schedule 
of vaccinations, usually given for free. It is better to take your children to the nearest 
health center to be vaccinated while they are healthy than to take them for treatment 
when they are sick or dying. The most important vaccines are:
1. DPT, for diphtheria, whooping cough (pertussis), and tetanus. A child 
needs 4 or 5 injections usually given at 2 months, 4 months, 6 months, and 18 
months old. Sometimes one more injection is given between 4 and 6 years old.
2. POLIO (infantile paralysis). The child needs drops in the mouth 4 or 5 times. 
In some countries the first vaccination is given at birth and the other 3 doses are  
given at the same time as the DPT injections. In other countries, the first 3 doses  
are given at the same time as the DPT injections, the fourth dose is given between  
12 and 18 months of age, and a fifth dose is given when the child is 4 years old. In a 
family where someone has HIV, do not use drops, use injections only.
3. BCG, for tuberculosis. A single injection is given under the skin of the left 
arm. Children can be vaccinated at birth or anytime afterwards. If any member of the 
household has tuberculosis, it is important to vaccinate babies in the first few weeks 
or months after birth. The vaccine makes a sore and leaves a scar.
4. MEASLES.  A child needs 1 injection given no younger than 9 months of age, 
and often a second injection at 15 months or older. In many countries a ‘3 in 1’ 
vaccine called MMR is given for measles, mumps, and rubella (German measles). 
One injection is given between 12 and 15 months old, and a second is given 
between 4 and 6 years of age. Do not give measles vaccinations to a child with HIV.
5. HepB (Hepatitis B). This vaccine is given in a series of 3 injections, at the same 
time as DPT injections. In some countries the first HepB is given at birth, the second 
at 2 months old, and the third at 6 months old. Make sure there are at least 4 weeks 
between the first and second injection, and 8 weeks between the second and third.
6. Hib (for Haemophilus influenza type b, which is a germ that causes 
meningitis and pneumonia in young children). Generally this vaccine is given in a 
series of 3 injections together with the first 3 DPT injections. 
7. Td or TT (Tetanus toxoid), for tetanus (lockjaw) for adults and children 
over 12 years old.  Throughout the world, tetanus vaccination is recommended with 
1 injection every 10 years. In some countries a Td injection is given between 9 and 
11 years of age (5 years after the last DPT vaccination), and then every 10 years. 
Pregnant women should be vaccinated during each pregnancy so that their babies 
will be protected against tetanus of the newborn (see p. 182 and 250).
8. Rotavirus. Give the oral vaccine 2 or 3 times (depending on the manufacturer) 
at 2 months, 4 months, and (if needed) 6 months old. It prevents this diarrhea 
disease, a leading cause of death for young children.
Vaccines for measles, polio, and tuberculosis must be kept frozen or very cold 
(under 8° C). The vaccines for Hepatitis B, tetanus, and the DPT must be kept very 
cold (under 8° C) but never frozen. Vaccine that has been prepared but not used 
should be thrown away. DPT is still good and useable if it remains cloudy 1 hour after 
preparing it. If it becomes clear or has white flecks in it, it is spoiled and will not work. 
For ways to keep vaccines cold, see Helping Health Workers Learn, Chapter 16.
Vaccinate your children on time.
Be sure they get the complete series of each vaccine they need.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
148
OTHER WAYS TO PREVENT SICKNESS AND INJURY
In this chapter we have talked about ways to prevent intestinal and other 
infections through hygiene, sanitation, and vaccination. All through this book you 
will find suggestions for the prevention of sickness and injury—from building healthy 
bodies by eating nutritious foods to the wise use of home remedies and modern 
medicines.
The Introduction and Words to the Village Health Worker give ideas for getting 
people working together to change the conditions that cause poor health.
In the remaining chapters, as specific health problems are discussed, you will 
find many suggestions for their prevention. By following these suggestions you can 
help make your home and village healthier places to live.
Keep in mind that one of the best ways to prevent serious illness and death is 
early and sensible treatment.
Early and sensible treatment is an 
important part of preventive medicine.
Before ending this chapter, we would like to mention a few aspects of prevention 
that are touched on in other parts of the book, but deserve special attention.
Habits that Affect Health
Some of the habits that people have not only damage their own health but in one 
way or another harm those around them. Many of these habits can be broken or 
avoided but the first step is to understand why breaking these habits is so important.
DRINKING
If alcohol has brought much joy, it has also brought 
much suffering—especially to the families of those who 
drink. A little alcohol now and then may do no harm. 
But too often a little leads to a lot. In much of the world, 
heavy or excessive drinking is one of the underlying 
causes of major health problems—even for those who 
do not drink. Not only can drunkenness harm the health 
of those who drink (through diseases such as cirrhosis 
of the liver, p. 328, and hepatitis, p. 172), but it also 
hurts the family and community in many ways. Through 
the loss of judgment when drunk—and of self respect 
when sober—it leads to much unhappiness, waste, 
and violence, often affecting those who are loved most.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
149
SMOKING
There are many reasons why smoking is dangerous 
to your own and your family’s health.
1. Smoking increases the risk of cancer of the 
lungs, mouth, throat, and lips. (The more you smoke, 
the greater the chance of dying of cancer.)
2. Smoking causes serious diseases of the lungs, 
including chronic bronchitis and emphysema (and is 
deadly for persons who already have these conditions 
or have asthma). 
3. Smoking can cause stomach ulcers or make 
them worse.
4. Smoking increases your chance of suffering or 
dying from heart disease or stroke.
5. Children whose parents smoke have more 
cases of pneumonia and other respiratory illness than 
children whose parents do not smoke.
6. Babies of mothers who smoked during 
pregnancy are smaller and develop more slowly than 
babies whose mothers did not smoke.
(turn page)
How many fathers have spent their last money on drink when their children were 
hungry? How many sicknesses result because a man spends the little bit of extra 
money he earns on drink rather than on improving his family’s living conditions? 
How many persons, hating themselves because they have hurt those they love, take 
another drink—to forget?
Once a person realizes that alcohol is harming the health and happiness of those 
around him, what can he do? First, he must admit that his drinking is a problem. He 
must be honest with himself and with others. Some individuals are able to simply 
decide to stop drinking. More often people need help and support—from family, 
friends, and others who understand how hard it may be to give up this habit. People 
who have been heavy drinkers and have stopped are often the best persons to help 
others do the same. In many areas Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) groups exist where 
recovering alcoholics help one another to stop drinking (see p. 429).
Drinking is not so much a problem of individuals as of a whole community. A 
community that recognizes this can do much to encourage those who are willing to 
make changes. If you are concerned about the misuse of alcohol in your community, 
help organize a meeting to discuss these problems and decide what actions to 
take. For more about harm from alcohol, and community action, see Helping Health 
Workers Learn, Chapters 5 and 27.
Many problems can be resolved when people work 
together and give each other help and support.
SMOKING
damages
stomach
lungs
heart and
circulation
children
of those
      who
   smoke
pregnant
women
(their
babies)
the
family food
budget.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
150
7. Parents, teachers, health workers, and others who smoke set an unhealthy 
example for children and young people, increasing the likelihood that they too will 
begin smoking.
8. Also, smoking costs money. It looks like little is spent, but it adds up to a lot. 
In poorer countries, many of the poorest persons spend more on tobacco than the 
country spends per person on its health program. If money spent on tobacco were 
spent for food instead, children and whole families could be healthier.
Anyone interested in the health of others should not smoke,
and should encourage others not to smoke.
Do not get your children used to drinking carbonated drinks.
IF YOU WANT HEALTHY CHILDREN
AND HAVE A LITTLE MONEY TO BUY THEM SOMETHING . . .
buy them a couple of eggs or other 
nutritious food,
not carbonated drinks!
YES
NO
CARBONATED DRINKS (soft drinks, soda pop, Coke, fizzy drinks, colas)
In some areas these drinks have become very popular. Often a poor mother will 
buy carbonated drinks for a child who is poorly nourished, when the same money 
could be better used to buy 2 eggs or other nutritious food.
Carbonated drinks have no nutritional value apart from sugar. And for the amount 
of sugar they contain, they are very expensive. Children who are given a lot of 
carbonated drinks and other sweet things often begin to get cavities and rotten 
teeth at an early age. Carbonated drinks are especially bad for persons with acid 
indigestion or stomach ulcer.
Natural drinks you make from fruits are healthier and often much cheaper than 
carbonated drinks.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
151
DEHYDRATION
Most children who die from diarrhea die because they do not have enough 
water left in their bodies. This lack of water is called dehydration.
Dehydration results when the body loses more liquid than it takes in. This can 
happen with severe diarrhea, especially when there is vomiting too. It can also 
happen in very serious illness, when a person is too sick to take much food or liquid.
People of any age can become dehydrated, but dehydration develops more 
quickly and is most dangerous in small children.
•  thirst is often a first, early sign of dehydration
•  little or no urine; the urine is dark yellow
•  sudden weight loss
•  dry mouth
•  sunken, tearless eyes
•  sagging in of the ‘soft spot’ 
in infants
•  loss of elasticity or 
stretchiness of the skin
Lift the skin between two fingers, like this . . .
If the skin fold does not fall 
right back to normal, the child 
is dehydrated.
CHAPTER
13
Any child with watery diarrhea is in danger of dehydration.
Some Very Common Sicknesses
It is important that everyone—especially mothers—know the signs of dehydration 
and how to prevent and treat it.
Signs of dehydration:
Very severe dehydration may cause rapid, weak pulse (see Shock, p. 77),  
fast, deep breathing, fever, or seizures (fits, convulsions, p. 178).
When a person has watery diarrhea, or diarrhea and vomiting, do not wait for 
signs of dehydration. Act quickly—see the next page.
152
To prevent or treat dehydration: When a person has watery diarrhea, act quickly:
♦ Give lots of liquids to drink: Rehydration Drink is best. Or give a thin cereal 
porridge or gruel, teas, soups, or even plain water.
♦ Keep giving food. As soon as the sick child (or adult) will accept food, give 
frequent feedings of foods he likes and accepts.
♦ To babies, keep giving breast milk often—and before other drinks.
A special Rehydration Drink helps to prevent or treat dehydration, especially in 
cases of severe watery diarrhea:
2 WAYS TO MAKE ‘HOME MIX’ REHYDRATION DRINK
1.	WITH SUGAR AND SALT  (Raw sugar or 
molasses can be used instead of sugar)
2.	WITH POWDERED CEREAL AND SALT     
(Powdered rice is best. Or use finely ground maize, wheat 
flour, sorghum, or cooked and mashed potatoes.)
In 1 liter   
of WATER
put half a 
teaspoon 
of SALT
and 8 heaping teaspoons 
(or 2 handfuls) of 
powdered CEREAL .
In 1 liter 
of clean 
WATER
put half 
of a level 
teaspoon 
of SALT
and 8 level 
teaspoons of 
SUGAR.
CAUTION: Before 
adding the sugar, 
taste the drink and 
be sure it is less 
salty than tears.
Boil for 5 to 7 minutes to 
form a liquid gruel or watery 
porridge. Cool the Drink 
quickly and start giving it to 
the child.
CAUTION: Taste the Drink each time before you give it 
to be sure it is not spoiled. Cereal drinks can spoil in a few 
hours in hot weather.
To either Drink add half a cup of fruit juice, 
coconut water, or mashed ripe banana, if available. 
This provides potassium which may help the child 
accept more food and drink.
IMPORTANT: Adapt the Drink to your area. If liter containers or teaspoons are not in most homes, adjust 
quantities to local forms of measurement. Where people traditionally give cereal gruels to young children, add 
enough water to make it liquid, and use that. Look for an easy and simple way.
Give the dehydrated person sips of this Drink every 5 minutes, day and night, until 
he begins to urinate normally. A large person needs 3 or more liters a day. A small 
child usually needs at least 1 liter a day, or 1 glass for each watery stool. Keep giving 
the Drink often in small sips, even if the person vomits. Not all of the Drink will be 
vomited.
WARNING: If dehydration gets worse or other danger signs appear, go for medical 
help (see p. 159). It may be necessary to give liquid in a vein (intravenous solution).
Note: In some countries packets of Oral Rehydration Salts (ORS) are available for mixing with 
water. These contain a simple mix of sugar, salt, citrate, zinc, and potassium (see p. 381).
However, homemade drinks—especially cereal drinks—when correctly prepared are often 
cheaper, safer, and more effective than ORS packets.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
153
DIARRHEA AND DYSENTERY
When a person has loose or watery stools, he has diarrhea. If mucus and blood 
can be seen in the stools, he has dysentery.
Diarrhea can be mild or serious. It can be acute (sudden and severe) or chronic 
(lasting many days).
Diarrhea is more common and more dangerous in young children, especially 
those who are poorly nourished.
This child is well nourished. He is less 
likely to get diarrhea. If he gets it he 
usually will get well again quickly.
This child is poorly nourished. He 
is more likely to get diarrhea—and 
there is a much greater chance he 
will die from it.
poor nutrition (p. 154). This weakens the 
child and makes diarrhea from other causes 
more frequent and worse.
shortage of water and unclean conditions (no 
latrines) spread the germs that cause diarrhea 
virus infection or ‘intestinal flu’
an infection of the gut caused by bacteria 	
(p. 131), amebas (p. 144), or giardia (p. 145) 
worm infections (p. 140 to 144) (most worm 
infections do not cause diarrhea)
infections outside the gut (ear infections, 
p. 309; tonsillitis, p. 309; measles, p. 311; 
urinary infections, p. 234)
malaria (falciparum type—in parts of Africa, 
Asia, and the Pacific, p. 186)
food poisoning (spoiled food, p. 135)
HIV (long-lasting diarrhea may be an early 
sign of AIDS, p. 399)
inability to digest milk (mainly in severely 
malnourished children and certain adults)
difficulty babies have digesting foods that are 
new to them (p. 154)
allergies to certain foods (seafood, crayfish, 
etc., p. 166); occasionally babies are allergic 
to cow’s milk or other milk
side effects produced by certain medicines, 
such as ampicillin or tetracycline (p. 58)
laxatives, purges, irritating or poisonous 
plants, certain poisons
eating too much unripe fruit or heavy, greasy 
foods
THE MAIN CAUSES OF DIARRHEA:
Diarrhea has many causes. Usually no medicines are needed, and the child 
gets well in a few days if you give him lots of Rehydration Drink and food. (If he 
does not eat much, give him a little food many times a day.) Occasionally, special 
treatment is needed. However, most diarrhea can be treated successfully in the 
home, even if you are not sure of the exact cause or causes.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
154
This results in a vicious circle, in which each makes the other worse. For this reason, 
good nutrition is important in both the prevention and treatment of diarrhea.
To learn about the kinds of foods that help the body resist or fight off different 
illnesses, including diarrhea, read Chapter 11.
The prevention of diarrhea depends both on good nutrition and cleanliness. Many 
suggestions for personal and public cleanliness are given in Chapter 12. These 
include the use of latrines, the importance of clean water, and the protection of foods 
from dirt and flies.
Here are some other important suggestions for preventing 
diarrhea in babies:
♦ Breastfeed rather than bottle feed babies. Give only 
breast milk for the first 6 months. Breast milk helps 
babies resist the infections that cause diarrhea. If it is not 
possible to breastfeed a baby, feed her with a cup and 
spoon. Do not use a baby bottle because it is harder to 
keep clean and more likely to cause an infection.
♦ When you begin to give the baby new or solid food, 
start by giving her just a little, mashing it well, and mixing 
it with a little breast milk. The baby has to learn how to digest 
new foods. If she starts with too much at one time, she may get 
diarrhea. Do not stop giving breast milk suddenly. Start 
with other foods while the baby is still breastfeeding.
♦ Keep the baby clean—and in a clean place. Try to 
keep her from putting dirty things in her mouth.
♦ Do not give babies unnecessary medicines.
Preventing diarrhea:
Although diarrhea has many different causes, the most common are infection 
and poor nutrition. With good hygiene and good food, most diarrhea could be 
prevented. And if treated correctly by giving lots of drink and food, fewer children 
who get diarrhea would die.
Diarrhea is also very dangerous for people with 
HIV, especially children. Using cotrimoxazole can 
prevent diarrhea in persons with HIV (see p. 357).
Children who are poorly nourished get 
diarrhea and die from it far more often than 
those who are well nourished. Yet diarrhea 
itself can be part of the cause of malnutrition.
Malnutrition causes diarrhea.
Diarrhea causes malnutrition.
Prevent diarrhea by preventing malnutrition.
Prevent malnutrition by preventing diarrhea.
THE ‘VICIOUS CIRCLE’ OF 
MALNUTRITION AND DIARRHEA
TAKES MANY CHILDREN’S LIVES.
BreastfeedING HELPS
PREVENT DIARRHEA
And if malnutrition already exists, diarrhea 
rapidly makes it worse.
YES
NO
MALNUTRITION
DIARRHEA
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
155
Treatment of diarrhea:
For most cases of diarrhea no medicine is needed. If the diarrhea is severe, 
the biggest danger is dehydration. If the diarrhea lasts a long time, the biggest 
danger is malnutrition. So the most important part of treatment has to do with 
giving enough liquids and enough food. No matter what the cause of diarrhea, 
always take care with the following:
1. PREVENT OR CONTROL DEHYDRATION. A person with diarrhea must drink 
a lot of liquids. If diarrhea is severe or there are signs of dehydration, give him 
Rehydration Drink (p. 152). Even if he does not want to drink, gently insist that he do 
so. Have him take several swallows every few minutes.
2. MEET NUTRITIONAL NEEDS. A person with diarrhea needs food as soon 
as he will eat. This is especially important in small children or persons who are 
already poorly nourished. Also, when a person has diarrhea, food passes through 
the gut very quickly and is not all used. So give the person food many times a 
day—especially if he only takes a little at a time.
♦ A baby with diarrhea should go on breastfeeding.
♦ An underweight child should get plenty of energy foods and some
body-building foods (proteins) all the time he has diarrhea—and extra when 
he gets well. If he stops eating because he feels too sick or is vomiting, he 
should eat again as soon as he can. Giving Rehydration Drink will help the 
child be able to eat. Although giving food may cause more frequent stools at 
first, it can save his life.
♦ If a child who is underweight has diarrhea that lasts for many days or keeps 
coming back, give him more food more often—at least 5 or 6 meals each day. 
Often no other treatment is needed.
♦ If possible, give zinc supplements to a baby or child with diarrhea (see p. 393).
FOODS FOR A PERSON WITH DIARRHEA
When the person is vomiting or 
feels too sick to eat, he should 
drink:
watery mush or broth of rice,  
maize powder, or potato
rice water (with some mashed rice)
chicken, meat, egg, or bean broth
REHYDRATION DRINK
Breast milk
yogurt or fermented milk drinks
As soon as the person is able to eat, in addition to giving the 
drinks listed at the left, he should eat a balanced selection of the 
following foods or similar ones:
body-building foods
chicken (boiled or roasted)
eggs (boiled)
meat (well cooked, without 
much fat or grease)
beans, lentils, or peas  
(well cooked and mashed)
fish (well cooked)
milk (sometimes this  
causes problems,  
see the next page)
energy foods
ripe or cooked bananas
crackers
rice, oatmeal, or other  
well‑cooked grain
fresh maize (well cooked  
and mashed)
potatoes
applesauce (cooked)
papaya
(It helps to add a little sugar or 
vegetable oil to the cereal foods.)
fatty or greasy foods
most raw fruits
any kind of laxative or purge
DO NOT EAT OR DRINK
highly seasoned food
alcoholic drinks
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
156
Diarrhea and milk:
Breast milk is the best food for babies. It helps prevent and combat diarrhea. 
Keep giving breast milk when the baby has diarrhea.
Cow’s milk, powdered milk, or canned milk can be good sources of energy 
and protein. Keep on giving them to a child with diarrhea. In a very few children 
these milks may cause more diarrhea. If this happens, try giving less milk and 
mixing it with other foods. But remember: a poorly nourished child with diarrhea 
must have enough energy foods and protein. If less milk is given, well cooked 
and mashed foods such as chicken, egg yolk, meat, fish, or beans should be 
added. Beans are easier to digest if their skins have been taken off and they are 
boiled and mashed.
As the child gets better, he will usually be able to drink more milk without getting 
diarrhea.
Medicines for diarrhea:
For most cases of diarrhea no medicines are needed. But in certain cases, 
using the right medicine can be important. However, many of the medicines commonly 
used for diarrhea do little or no good. Some are actually harmful:
GENERALLY IT IS BETTER NOT TO USE THE FOLLOWING 
MEDICINES IN THE TREATMENT OF DIARRHEA:
‘Anti diarrhea’ medicines with kaolin and pectin (such as Kaopectate, p. 383) 
make diarrhea thicker and less frequent. But they do not correct dehydration or control 
infection. Some anti diarrhea medicines, like loperamide (Imodium) or diphenoxylate 
(Lomotil) may even cause harm or make infections last longer.
‘ANTI DIARRHEA MEDICINES’ ACT LIKE PLUGS. THEY KEEP 
IN THE INFECTED MATERIAL THAT NEEDS TO COME OUT.
‘Anti-diarrhea’ mixtures containing neomycin or streptomycin should 
not be used. They irritate the gut and often do more harm than good.
Antibiotics like ampicillin and tetracycline are useful only in some cases of diarrhea 
(see p. 158). But they themselves sometimes cause diarrhea, especially in small children. 
If, after taking these antibiotics for more than 2 or 3 days, diarrhea gets worse rather than 
better, stop taking them—the antibiotics may be the cause.
Chloramphenicol has certain dangers in its use (see p. 356) and should never be used for 
mild diarrhea or given to babies less than 1 month old.
Laxatives and purges should never be given to persons with diarrhea. They will make 
it worse and increase the danger of dehydration.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
157
Special treatment in different cases of diarrhea:
While most cases of diarrhea are best treated by giving plenty of liquids and 
food, and no medicine, sometimes special treatment is needed.
In considering treatment, keep in mind that some cases of diarrhea, especially 
in small children, are caused by infections outside the gut. Always check 
for infections of the ears, the throat, and the urinary system. If found, these 
infections should be treated. Also look for signs of measles.
If the child has mild diarrhea together with signs of a cold, the diarrhea is 
probably caused by a virus, or ‘intestinal flu’, and no special treatment is called for. 
Give lots of liquids and all the food the child will accept.
In certain difficult cases of diarrhea, analysis of the stools or other tests may be 
needed to know how to treat it correctly. But usually you can learn enough from 
asking specific questions, seeing the stools, and looking for certain signs Here are 
some guidelines for treatment according to signs.
1. Sudden, mild diarrhea. No fever. (Upset stomach? ‘Intestinal flu’?)
♦  Drink lots of liquids. Usually no special treatment is needed. It is usually 
best not to use ‘diarrhea plug’ medicines such as kaolin with pectin 
(Kaopectate, p. 383) or diphenoxylate (Lomotil). They are never necessary 
and do not help either to correct dehydration or get rid of infection so why 
waste money buying them? Never give them to persons who are very ill, or 
to small children.
2. Diarrhea with vomiting. (Many causes)
♦   If a person with diarrhea is also vomiting, the danger 
of dehydration is greater, especially in small children. 
It is very important to give the Rehydration Drink 
(p. 152), tea, soup, or whatever liquids he will take. 
Keep giving the Drink, even if the person vomits it 
out again. Some will stay inside. Give sips every 5 to 
10 minutes.
♦  If you cannot control the vomiting or if the 
dehydration gets worse, seek medical help fast.
3. Diarrhea with mucus and blood. Often chronic. No fever. There may be 
diarrhea some days and constipation other days. (Possibly amebic dysentery. 
For more details, see page 144.)
♦ Use metronidazole (p. 368). Take the medicine according to the 
recommended dose. If the diarrhea continues after treatment, seek  
medical advice.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
158
4. Severe diarrhea with blood, with fever. (Bacterial dysentery caused by Shigella)
♦ Give ciprofloxacin to adults, 500 mg. 2 times a day for 3 days (see p. 
356). But pregnant women and children under 18 years old should not use 
ciprofloxacin. (For children under 8 weeks old, seek medical help.) Shigella 
is often resistant to ampicillin (p. 352) and cotrimoxazole (p. 357) but they 
are still being used. If the first medicine you try does not bring improvement 
within 2 days, try another or seek medical help. Women in the first 3 months 
of pregnancy should not use cotrimoxazole (see p. 357). Azithromycin will 
also work, and is safe during pregnancy and for children. For adults, give 500 
mg. by mouth the first day, and 250 mg. once a day for 4 days. For children’s 
doses, see a health worker.
5. Severe diarrhea with fever, usually no blood.
♦ Fever may be partly caused by dehydration. Give lots of Rehydration Drink 
(p. 152). If the person is very ill and does not improve within 6 hours after 
beginning Rehydration Drink, seek medical help.
♦ Check for signs of typhoid fever. If present, treat for typhoid (see p. 188).
♦ In areas where falciparum malaria is common, also treat persons with diarrhea 
and fever for malaria (see p. 186), especially if they have an enlarged spleen.
6. Yellow, bad smelling diarrhea with bubbles or froth, without blood or mucus. 
Often a lot of gas in the belly, and burps that taste bad, like sulfur. 
♦ This may be caused by parasites called giardia (see p. 145) or perhaps 
by malnutrition. In either case, plenty of liquid, nutritious food, and rest 
are often the best treatment. Severe giardia infections can be treated with 
metronidazole (p. 368). Quinacrine (Atabrine) is cheaper, but has worse side 
effects (p. 369).
7. Chronic diarrhea (diarrhea that lasts a long time or keeps coming back).
♦  This can be in part caused by malnutrition, or by a chronic infection such as 
that caused by amebas or giardia. See that the child eats more nutritious food 
more times a day (p. 110). If the diarrhea still continues, seek medical help.
8. Diarrhea like rice water. (Cholera)
♦ ‘Rice water’ stools in very large quantities may be a sign of cholera. In 
countries where this dangerous disease occurs, cholera often comes in 
epidemics (striking many people at once) and is usually worse in older 
children and adults. Severe dehydration can develop quickly, especially if 
there is vomiting also. Treat the dehydration continuously (see p. 152), and 
give doxycycline or tetracycline (p. 355) or erythromycin 
for children (p. 354) only in severe cases. 
Cholera should be reported to the health 
authorities. Seek medical help.
A ‘cholera bed’ like this can be made for 
persons with very severe diarrhea. Watch 
how much liquid the person is losing 
and be sure he drinks larger amounts of 
Rehydration Drink. Give him the Drink 
almost continuously, and have him drink 
as much as he can.
sleeve made of 
plastic sheet
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
159
Care of Babies with Diarrhea
Diarrhea is especially dangerous in babies and 
small children. Often no medicine is needed, but 
special care must be taken because a baby can die 
very quickly of dehydration.
♦ Continue breastfeeding and also give sips of 
Rehydration Drink.
♦ If vomiting is a problem, give breast milk often, 
but only a little at a time. Also give Rehydration 
Drink in small sips every 5 to 10 minutes (see 
Vomiting, p. 161).
♦ If there is no breast milk, try giving frequent 
small feedings of some other milk or milk 
substitute (like milk made from soybeans) 
mixed to half normal strength with boiled 
water. If milk seems to make the diarrhea 
worse, give some other protein (mashed 
chicken, eggs, lean meat, or skinned mashed 
beans, mixed with sugar or well-cooked rice or 
another carbohydrate, and boiled water).
♦ If possible, give zinc supplements (see p. 393).
♦ If the child is younger than 1 month, try to find a health worker before giving 
any medicine. If there is no health worker and the child is very sick, give him 
an ‘infant syrup’ that contains ampicillin: half a teaspoon 4 times daily (see 
p. 352). It is better not to use other antibiotics.
When to Seek Medical Help in Cases of Diarrhea
Diarrhea and dysentery can be very dangerous—especially in small children. 
In the following situations you should get medical help:
•	 if diarrhea lasts more than 4 days and is not getting better—or more than  
1 day in a small child with severe diarrhea
•	 if the person shows signs of dehydration and is getting worse
•	 if the child vomits everything he drinks, or drinks nothing, or if frequent 
vomiting continues for more than 3 hours after beginning Rehydration Drink
•	 if the child begins to have seizures, or if the feet and face swell
•	 if the person was very sick, weak, or malnourished before the diarrhea began 
(especially a little child or a very old person)
•	 if there is much blood in the stools. This can be dangerous even if there is only 
very little diarrhea (see gut obstruction, p. 94).
GIVE HIM BREAST MILK
AND ALSO
REHYDRATION DRINK
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
160
THE CARE OF A PERSON WITH ACUTE DIARRHEA
 DIARRHEA
Are there signs of dehydration? (little or 
no urine, sunken eyes, dry mouth, etc.)
Prevent dehydration:
Drink lots of liquids.
PREVENT OR CORRECT MALNUTRITION:
Give food as soon as the person will eat.
Bland, well-mashed foods are best­—a lot 
of energy foods with some body-building 
foods. Continue breastfeeding.
Control the dehydration:
Drink lots of liquids and 
REHYDRATION DRINK. (see p. 152)
Is there fever that lasts more than 6 hours 
after starting to treat the dehydration?
Give metronidazole for 
amebas. (see p. 369)
Diarrhea with 
blood or mucus?
Give ampicillin (p. 352) or 
cotrimoxazole (see p. 358).
Cured
No better 
within 3 days
Cured
No better
Diarrhea yellow 
and very frothy?
Give metronidazole 
or quinacrine for 
giardia. (see p. 369)
Give no medicine.
Continue giving Rehydration
Drink and food.
Are there signs of typhoid 
fever? (temperature rises 
every day, slow pulse, very 
ill, etc., see p. 188)
Continue to give cotrimoxazole, ampicillin, or 
chloramphenicol for 2 weeks. (see p. 356)
Cured
No better
SEEK MEDICAL HELP
Cured
No better
Cured
No better
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
161
VOMITING
Many people, especially children, have an occasional ‘stomach upset’ with 
vomiting. Often no cause can be found. There may be mild stomach or gut ache or 
fever. This kind of simple vomiting usually is not serious and clears up by itself.
Vomiting is one of the signs of many different 
problems, some minor and some quite serious, so it is 
important to examine the person carefully. Vomiting often 
comes from a problem in the stomach or guts, such 
as: an infection (see diarrhea, p. 153), poisoning from 
spoiled food (p. 135), or ‘acute abdomen’ (for example, 
appendicitis or something blocking the gut, p. 94). Also, 
almost any sickness with high fever or severe pain may 
cause vomiting, especially malaria (p. 186), hepatitis 
(p. 172), tonsillitis (p. 309), earache (p. 309), meningitis 
(p. 185), urinary infection (p. 234), gallbladder pain 
(p. 329) or migraine headache (p. 162).
Danger signs with vomiting—seek medical help quickly!
•	 dehydration that increases and that you cannot control (p. 152)
•	 severe vomiting that lasts more than 24 hours
•	 violent vomiting, especially if vomit is dark green, brown, or smells like shit 
(signs of obstruction, p. 94)
•	 constant pain in the gut, especially if the person cannot defecate (shit)  
or if you cannot hear gurgles when you put your ear to the belly (see acute 
abdomen: obstruction, appendicitis, p. 94)
•	 vomiting of blood (ulcer, p. 128; cirrhosis, p. 328)
To help control simple vomiting:
♦ Eat nothing while vomiting is severe,
♦ Sip a cola drink or ginger ale. Some herbal teas, like camomile, 
may also help.
♦ For dehydration give small frequent sips of cola, tea, or 
Rehydration Drink (p. 152).
♦ If vomiting does not stop soon, use a vomit control medicine like 
promethazine (p. 385) or diphenhydramine (p. 386). But do not 
give these medicines to children under 2 years old. 
Most of these come in pills, syrups, injections, and suppositories (soft pills you 
push up the anus). Tablets or syrup can also be put up the anus. Grind up the tablet 
in a little water. Put it in with an enema set or syringe without a needle.
When taken by mouth, the medicine should be swallowed with very little water 
and nothing else should be swallowed for 5 minutes. Never give more than the 
recommended dose. Do not give a second dose until dehydration has been 
corrected and the person has begun to urinate. If severe vomiting and diarrhea make 
medication by mouth or anus impossible, give an injection of one of the vomit‑control 
medicines. Promethazine may work best. Take care not to give too much.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
162
HEADACHES AND MIGRAINES
SIMPLE HEADACHE can be helped by rest 
and aspirin. It often helps to put a cloth 
soaked in hot water on the back of the 
neck and to massage (rub) the neck 
and shoulders gently. Some other home 
remedies also seem to help.
Headache is common with 
any sickness that causes fever. If 
headache is severe, check for signs 
of meningitis (p. 185).
Headaches that keep coming back 
may be a sign of a chronic illness or 
poor nutrition. It is important to eat well 
and get enough sleep. If the headaches 
do not go away, seek medical help.
A MIGRAINE is a severe throbbing 
headache often on one side of the head 
only. Migraine attacks may come often, 
or months or years apart.
A typical migraine begins with blurring of vision, seeing strange spots of light, or 
numbness of one hand or foot. This is followed by severe headache, which may last 
hours or days. Often there is vomiting. Migraines are very painful, but not dangerous.
TO STOP A MIGRAINE, DO THE FOLLOWING AT THE FIRST SIGN:
♦ Take 2 aspirins with a cup of strong coffee 
or strong black tea.
♦ Lie down in a dark, quiet place. Do your 
best to relax. Try not to think about your 
problems.
♦ For especially bad migraine headaches, 
take aspirin, if possible with codeine, or 
with another sedative. Or obtain pills 
of ergotamine with caffeine (Cafergot, 
p. 379). Take 2 pills at first and 1 pill every 
30 minutes until the pain goes away. Do 
not take more than 6 pills in 1 day.
WARNING: Do not use Cafergot during 
pregnancy.
For simple or nervous headache, 
folk cures sometimes work as 
well as modern medicine.
Mexican 
folk cure
aspirin
aspirin
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
163
COLDS AND THE FLU
Colds and the flu are common virus infections that may 
cause runny nose, cough, sore throat, and sometimes fever 
or pain in the joints. There may be mild diarrhea, especially 
in young children.
Colds and the flu almost always go away without 
medicine. Do not use penicillin, tetracycline, or other 
antibiotics, as they will not help at all and may cause harm.
♦ Drink plenty of water and get enough rest.
♦ Aspirin (p. 378) or acetaminophen (p. 379) helps lower 
temperature and relieve body aches and headaches. 
More expensive ‘cold tablets’ are no better than aspirin. So why waste your 
money?
♦ No special diet is needed. However, fruit juices, especially orange juice or 
lemonade, are helpful.
For treating coughs and stuffy noses that come with colds, see the next pages.
WARNING: Do not give any kind of antibiotic or injections to a child with a simple 
cold. They will not help and may cause harm. 
If a cold or the flu lasts more than a week, or if the person has fever, coughs up 
a lot of phlegm (mucus with pus), has shallow fast breathing or chest pain, he could 
be developing bronchitis or pneumonia (see p. 170 and 171). An antibiotic may be 
called for. The danger of a cold turning into pneumonia is greater in old people, in 
those who have lung problems like chronic bronchitis, in people who cannot move 
much, and in people with HIV. People with HIV can take cotrimoxazole daily to 
prevent pneumonia and other infections (see p. 357).
Sore throat is often part of a cold. No special medicine is needed, but it may help 
to gargle with warm water. However, if the sore throat begins suddenly, with high 
fever, it could be a strep throat. Special treatment is needed (see p. 309).
Prevention of colds:
♦ Getting enough sleep and eating well helps prevent colds. Eating oranges, 
tomatoes, and other fruit containing vitamin C may also help.
♦ Contrary to popular belief, colds do not come from getting cold or wet 
(although getting very cold, wet, or tired can make a cold worse). A cold is 
‘caught’ from others who have the infection and sneeze the virus into the air.
♦ To keep from giving his cold to others, the sick person should eat and sleep 
separately—and take special care to keep far away from small babies. He 
should cover his nose and mouth when he coughs or sneezes.
♦ To prevent a cold from leading to earache (p. 309), try not to blow your 
nose—just wipe it. Teach children to do the same.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
164
3. Breathing hot water vapor as described on page 168 helps clear a stuffy nose.
4. Wipe a runny or stuffy nose, but try not to blow it. Blowing the nose may lead to 
earache and sinus infections.
5. Persons who often get earaches or sinus trouble after a cold can help prevent these 
problems by using decongestant nose drops with phenylephrine or ephedrine (p. 383). 
After sniffing a little salt water, put the drops in the nose like this:
With the head sideways, put 2 or 3 drops in the 
lower nostril. Wait a couple of minutes and then 
do the other side.
CAUTION: Use decongestant drops 
no more than 3 times a day, for no 
more than 3 days.
A decongestant syrup (with phenylephrine or something similar) may also help.
STUFFY AND RUNNY NOSES
A stuffy or runny nose can result from a cold or allergy (see next page). A lot of 
mucus in the nose may cause ear infections in children or sinus problems in adults.
To help clear a stuffy nose, do the following:
1. In little children, carefully suck the mucus 
out of the nose with a suction bulb or syringe 
without a needle, like this:
Prevent ear and sinus infections—try not to blow your nose, just wipe it.
2. Older children and adults can put a little salt 
water into their hand and sniff it into the nose. This 
helps to loosen the mucus.The water should not 
be too salty. 1/4 teaspoon of salt mixed in a cup of 
water is enough. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
165
SINUS TROUBLE (SINUSITIS)
Sinusitis is an acute or chronic (long-term) inflammation of the sinuses or hollows in 
the bone that open into the nose. It usually occurs after a person has had an infection 
of the ears or throat, or after a bad cold.
Signs:
•	 Pain in the face above and below the eyes, here 
(It hurts more when you tap lightly just over the 
bones, or when the person bends over.)
•	 Thick mucus or pus in the nose, perhaps with a 
bad smell. The nose is often stuffy.
•   Fever (sometimes).
•   Certain teeth may hurt.
Treatment:
♦ Drink a lot of water.
♦ Sniff a little salt water into the nose (see p. 164), or breathe steam from hot 
water to clear the nose (see p. 168).
♦ Put hot compresses on the face.
♦ Use decongestant nose drops such as phenylephrine (Neo-synephrine, p. 383).
♦ Use an antibiotic such as tetracycline (p. 356), ampicillin (p. 352), or penicillin 
(p. 352).
♦ If the person does not get better, seek medical help.
Prevention:
When you get a cold and a stuffy nose, try to keep your nose clear.  
Follow the instructions on page 164.
HAY FEVER (ALLERGIC RHINITIS)
Runny nose and itchy eyes can be caused by an 
allergic reaction to something in the air that a person 
has breathed in (see the next page). It is often worse 
at certain times of year.
Treatment:
Use an antihistamine such as chlorpheniramine 
(p. 386). Dimenhydrinate (Dramamine, p. 386), 
usually sold for motion sickness, also works.
Prevention:
Find out what things cause this reaction (for 
example: dust, chicken feathers, pollen, mold) and 
try to avoid them.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
166
ALLERGIC REACTIONS
An allergy is a disturbance or reaction that affects only certain persons when things 
they are sensitive or allergic to are . . .
•  breathed in
•  eaten
•  injected
•  or touch the skin
Allergic reactions, which can be mild or very serious, include:
•  itching rashes, lumpy patches, or hives (p. 203)
•  runny nose and itching or burning eyes (hay fever, p. 165)
•  irritation in the throat, difficulty breathing, or asthma (see next page)
•  allergic shock (p. 70)
•  diarrhea (in children allergic to milk—a rare cause of diarrhea, p. 156)
An allergy is not an infection and cannot be passed from one person to another. 
However, children of allergic parents also tend to have allergies.
Often allergic persons suffer more in certain seasons—or whenever they 
come in touch with the substances that bother them. Common causes of allergic 
reactions are:
pollen of 
certain 
flowers and 
grasses
chicken 
feathers
dust
kapok or feather 
pillows
moldy blankets or 
clothes
certain medicines, 
especially injections of 
penicillin or horse serum 
(see p. 70)
hair from cats and 
other animals
specific food, especially 
fish, shellfish, beer, etc.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
167
ASTHMA
A person with asthma has fits or attacks of difficult breathing. 
Listen for a hissing or wheezing sound, especially when breathing 
out. When he breathes in, the skin behind his collar bones 
and between his ribs may suck in as he tries to get air. If the 
person cannot get enough air, his nails and lips may turn 
blue, and his neck veins may swell. Usually there is no fever.
Asthma often begins in childhood and may be a problem 
for life. It is not contagious, but is more common in children with relatives who have 
asthma. It is generally worse during certain months of the year or at night. 
An asthma attack may be caused by eating or breathing things to which 
the person is allergic (see p. 166). In children asthma often starts with a cold. 
Nervousness or worry may bring on an asthma attack. Asthma can also be caused 
by unclean air (air pollution), such as smoke from cigarettes, inside cooking fires, 
burning fields, or cars and trucks.
Treatment:
♦ If asthma gets worse inside the house, the person should go outside to a place 
where the air is cleanest. Remain calm and be gentle with the person. Reassure him.
♦ Give a lot of liquids. This loosens mucus and makes breathing easier. Breathing 
water vapor may also help (see p. 168).
♦ Strong coffee or black tea can help relieve an 
asthma attack if you do not have any medicines.
♦ For attacks, treat with the rescue inhaler 
salbutamol (albuterol, see p. 384) as often as 
needed. This is a spray medicine that you want to 
breathe in as deeply as possible. 
♦ For frequent attacks, or asthma that makes you gasp for breath while 
walking or during mild exercise, also use the controller inhaler (beclomethasone, 
see p. 384). Using a controller medicine can prevent attacks, save you money, 
and make you feel better than always responding to an asthma emergency. 
Using a “spacer” with your inhaler allows more medicine to get to the lungs.
♦ For severe asthma where you cannot get enough air and do not improve with 
salbutamol, use prednisolone by mouth right away, and then continue for 3 to 7 
days (see p. 385). In emergencies if you have no other medicines you can inject 
epinephrine (adrenalin, see p. 385) under the skin.
♦ In rare cases, worms cause asthma. Try giving mebendazole (p. 373) to a child 
who starts having asthma if you think she has worms.
♦  If the person does not get better, seek medical help.
Prevention:
A person with asthma should avoid eating or breathing things that bring on 
attacks. The house or work place should be kept clean. Keep chickens and other 
animals outside. Air bedding in the sunshine. Sometimes it helps to sleep outside 
in the open air. Drink at least 8 glasses of water each day to keep the mucus loose. 
Persons with asthma may improve when they move to where the air is cleaner.
sitting 
up to 
breathe
If you have asthma do not smoke—smoking damages your lungs even more.
See p. 384 to 
learn how to 
make a spacer 
for your inhaler.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
168
COUGH
Coughing is not a sickness in itself, but is a sign of many different sicknesses that 
affect the throat, lungs, or bronchi (the network of air tubes going into the lungs). Below 
are some of the problems that cause different kinds of coughs:
Coughing is the body’s way of cleaning the breathing system and getting rid of 
phlegm (mucus with pus) and germs in the throat or lungs. So when a cough produces 
phlegm, do not take medicine to stop the cough, but rather do something to help 
loosen and bring up the phlegm.
Treatment for cough:
1. To loosen mucus and ease any kind of cough, 
drink lots of water. This works better than any medicine.
Also breathe hot water vapors. Sit on a chair with 
a bucket of very hot water at your feet. Place a sheet 
over the bucket to catch the vapors as they rise. 
Breathe the vapors deeply for 15 minutes. Repeat 
several times a day. Some people like to add mint or 
eucalyptus leaves or Vaporub, but hot water works 
just as well alone.
CAUTION: Do not use eucalyptus or Vaporub if the 
person has asthma. They make it worse.
DRY COUGH WITH
LITTLE OR NO PHLEGM:
COUGH WITH MUCH
 OR LITTLE PHLEGM:
COUGH WITH
A WHEEZE OR WHOOP
AND TROUBLE BREATHING:
cold or flu (p. 163)
worms—when passing 
through the lungs (p. 140)
measles (p. 311)
smoker’s cough  
(smoking, p. 149)
bronchitis (p. 170)
pneumonia (p. 171)
asthma (p. 167)
smoker’s cough, 
especially when 
getting up in the 
morning (p. 149)
asthma (p. 167)
whooping cough (p. 313)
diphtheria (p. 313)
heart trouble (p. 325)
something stuck in the 
throat (p. 79)
CHRONIC OR PERSISTENT COUGH:
COUGHING UP BLOOD:
tuberculosis (p. 179)
pneumonia (yellow, green, or 
blood‑streaked phlegm, p. 171)
severe worm infection (p. 140)
cancer of the lungs or throat (p. 149)
tuberculosis (p. 179)
smoker’s or miner’s cough (p. 149)
asthma (repeated attacks, p. 167)
chronic bronchitis (p. 170)
emphysema (p. 170)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
169
2. For all kinds of cough, especially a dry cough, the following cough syrup can 
be given:
Take a teaspoonful every 2 or 3 hours.
WARNING: Do not give honey to babies under 1 year. Make the syrup with sugar 
instead of honey.
3. For a severe dry cough that does not let you sleep, you can take a syrup 
with codeine (p. 383). Tablets of aspirin with codeine (or even aspirin alone) also 
help. If there is a lot of phlegm or wheezing, do not use codeine.
4. For a cough with wheezing (difficult, noisy breathing), see Asthma (p. 167), 
Chronic Bronchitis (p. 170), and Heart Trouble (p. 325).
5. Try to find out what sickness is causing the cough and treat that. If the 
cough lasts a long time, if there is blood, pus, or smelly phlegm in it, or if the person 
is losing weight or has continual difficulty breathing, see a health worker.
6. If you have any kind of a cough, do not smoke. Smoking damages the lungs.
HOW TO DRAIN MUCUS FROM THE LUNGS (POSTURAL DRAINAGE)
When a person who has a bad cough is 
very old or weak and cannot get rid of the 
sticky mucus or phlegm in his chest, it will help 
if he drinks a lot of water. Also do the following:
♦ First, have him breathe hot water vapors 
to loosen the mucus.
♦ Then pound him lightly on the back with 
a cupped hand. This will help to bring 
out the mucus.
Mix:
1 part 
honey
1 part 
lemon juice
To prevent a cough, do not smoke.
To cure a cough, treat the illness that causes it—and do not smoke.
To calm a cough, and loosen phlegm, drink lots of water—and do not smoke.
+
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
170
BRONCHITIS
Bronchitis is an infection of the bronchi or tubes that carry air to the lungs. 
It causes a noisy cough, often with mucus or phlegm. Bronchitis is usually 
caused by a virus, so antibiotics do not generally help. Use antibiotics only if 
the bronchitis lasts more than a week and is not getting better, if the person 
shows signs of pneumonia (see the following page), or if he already has a 
chronic lung problem.
CHRONIC BRONCHITIS
Signs:
•	 A cough, with mucus that lasts for months or years. 
Sometimes the cough gets worse, and there may be 
fever. A person who has this kind of cough, but does 
not have another long term illness such as tuberculosis 
or asthma, probably has chronic bronchitis.
•	 It occurs most frequently in older persons who have 
been heavy smokers.
•	 It can lead to emphysema, a very serious and 
incurable condition in which the tiny air pockets of the 
lungs break down. A person with emphysema has a 
hard time breathing, especially with exercise, and his 
chest becomes big ‘like a barrel’.
Treatment:
♦ Stop smoking.
♦ Take an anti-asthma medicine with salbutamol (p. 384).
♦ Persons with chronic bronchitis should use cotrimoxazole or amoxicillin every time 
they have a cold or ‘flu’ with a fever.
♦ If the person has trouble coughing up sticky phlegm, have him breathe hot water 
vapors (p. 168) and then help him with postural drainage (see p. 169).
‘barrel
chest’
Emphysema can result 
from chronic asthma, 
chronic bronchitis, or 
smoking.
If you have a chronic cough
(or want to prevent one),
DO NOT SMOKE!
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
171
PNEUMONIA
Pneumonia is an acute infection of the lungs. It often occurs after another 
respiratory illness such as measles, whooping cough, flu, bronchitis, asthma—or 
after any very serious illness, especially in babies and old people. Also, persons 
with HIV may develop pneumonia.
Signs:
•	 Sudden chills and then high fever.
•	 Rapid, shallow breathing, with little 
grunts or sometimes wheezing. The 
nostrils may spread with each breath.
•	 Fever (sometimes newborns 
and old or very weak persons 
have severe pneumonia with 
little or no fever).
•	 Cough (often with yellow, 
greenish, rust colored, or 
slightly bloody mucus).
•	 Chest pain (sometimes).
•	 The person looks very ill.
•	 Cold sores often appear on the 
face or lips (p. 232).
A very sick child with fast, shallow 
breathing probably has pneumonia. For a 
newborn baby, fast breathing means more than 60 breaths a minute. For a baby 
between 2 months and 1 year, fast breathing is more than 50 breaths a minute, and 
for a child between 1 and 5 years old, 40 breaths a minute. (If breathing is rapid and 
deep, check for dehydration, p. 151, or hyperventilation, p. 24.) Do not count the 
breaths while the child is crying or just after she has stopped.
Treatment:
♦ For pneumonia, treatment with antibiotics can make the difference between 
life and death. Give penicillin (p. 351), cotrimoxazole (p. 357), or erythromycin 
(p. 354). In serious cases, inject procaine penicillin (p. 352), adults: 
400,000 units (250 mg.) 2 or 3 times a day, or give amoxicillin by mouth 
(p. 352 to 353), 500 mg., 3 times a day. Give small children ¼ to ½ the adult 
dose. For children under 6, amoxicillin is usually best.
♦ Give aspirin (p. 378) or acetaminophen (p. 379) to lower the temperature and 
lessen the pain. Acetaminophen is safer for children under 12.
♦ Give plenty of liquids. If the person will not eat, give him liquid foods or 
Rehydration Drink (see p. 152).
♦ Ease the cough and loosen the mucus by giving the person plenty of water 
and having him breathe hot water vapors (see p. 168). Postural drainage may 
also help (see p. 169).
♦ If the person is wheezing, an anti-asthma medicine may help (see p. 384).
voice box
trachea
lungs
bronchi 
(air tubes)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
172
HEPATITIS
Hepatitis is an inflammation of the liver usually caused by a virus, but also by 
bacteria, alcohol, or chemical poisoning. There are 3 major types of hepatitis (A, B, 
and C) and it can spread from person to person whether or not there are signs of the 
disease. Even though in some places people call it ‘the fever’ (see p. 26), hepatitis 
often causes little or no rise in temperature.
A person with Hepatitis A or Hepatitis B is often very sick for 2 to 3 weeks, weak for 
1 to 4 months after, and then usually gets better. 
Hepatitis A is usually mild in small children, but more serious in older persons and in 
pregnant women. Hepatitis B is more serious and can lead to permanent scarring of the 
liver (cirrhosis), liver cancer, and even death. Hepatitis C is also very dangerous and can 
lead to permanent liver infections. It is a major cause of death for people with HIV.
Signs:
Treatment:
♦ Antibiotics do not work against hepatitis. In fact some medicines such as 
acetaminophen will cause added damage to the sick liver. Do not use medicines.
♦ The sick person should rest and drink lots of liquids. If he refuses most food, give 
him orange juice, papaya, and other fruit plus broth or vegetable soup. It may help 
to take vitamins. To control vomiting, see p. 161.
♦ When the sick person can eat, give a balanced meal. Vegetables and fruit are 
good, with some protein (p. 110 to 111). But do not give a lot of protein (meat, 
eggs, fish, etc.) because this makes the damaged liver work too hard. Avoid lard 
and fatty foods. Do not drink any alcohol for at least 6 months.
Prevention:
♦ Small children often have hepatitis without any signs of sickness, but they can 
spread the disease to others. It is very important that everyone in the house follow 
all the guidelines of cleanlines with great care (see pages 133 to 139). 
♦ The Hepatitis A virus passes from the stool of one person to the mouth of another 
by way of contaminated water or food. To prevent others from getting sick, bury 
the sick person’s stools. The sick person, his family and caregivers must try to stay 
clean and wash their hands often.
♦ The Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C viruses can pass from person to person through 
sex, injections with unsterile needles, transfusions of infected blood and from 
mother to baby at birth. Take steps to prevent passing hepatitis to others: use a 
condom during sex (see p. 290), follow the HIV prevention suggestions on p. 401, 
and always boil needles and syringes before each use (see p. 74).
♦ Vaccines now exist for Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B but they may be expensive or 
not be available everywhere. Hepatitis B is dangerous and there is no cure, so if the 
vaccine is accessible all children should be vaccinated.
WARNING: Hepatitis can also be transmitted by giving injections with unsterile needles: 
Always boil needles and syringes before each use (see p. 74).
•	 Feels tired. Does not want to 
eat or smoke. Often goes days 
without eating anything.
•	 Sometimes there is a pain on 
the right side near the liver. 
Sometimes there is pain in 
the muscles or joints.
•	 May have a fever.
•	 After a few days, the eyes 
and skin turn yellow.
•	 Sight or smell of food  
may cause vomiting.
•	 The urine may turn dark like 
Coca Cola, and the stools 
may become whitish, or the 
person may have diarrhea.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
173
ARTHRITIS (PAINFUL, INFLAMED JOINTS)
Most chronic joint pain, or arthritis, in older people cannot be cured completely. 
However, the following offer some relief:
♦ Rest. If possible, avoid hard work and heavy exercise that bother the painful 
joints. If the arthritis causes some fever, it helps to take naps during the day.
♦ Place cloths soaked in hot water on the painful joints (see p. 195).
♦ Aspirin helps relieve pain; the dose for arthritis is higher than that for calming 
other pain. Adults should take 3 tablets, 4 times a day. If your ears begin 
to ring, take less. To avoid stomach problems caused by aspirin, always 
take it with food, or a large glass of water. If stomach pain continues, take 
the aspirin not only with food and lots of water, but also with a spoonful of an 
antacid such as Maalox or Gelusil.
♦ It is important to do simple exercises to help maintain or increase the range of 
motion in the painful joints.
If only one joint is swollen and feels hot, it may be 
infected—especially if there is fever. Use an antibiotic such as 
penicillin (see p. 350) and if possible see a health worker.
Painful joints in young people and children may be a sign 
of other serious illness, such as rheumatic fever (p. 310) or 
tuberculosis (p. 179). For more information on joint pain, see 
Disabled Village Children, Chapters 15 and 16.
BACK PAIN
Back pain has many causes. Here are some:
Chronic upper back pain with cough 
and weight loss may be TB of the 
lungs (p. 179).
Mid back pain in a child 
may be TB of the spine, 
especially if the backbone 
has a hump or lump.
Low back pain that is worse the day 
after heavy lifting or straining may be 
a sprain.
Severe low back pain that first comes 
suddenly when lifting or twisting may 
be a slipped disc, especially if one leg 
or foot becomes painful or numb and 
weak. This can result from a pinched 
nerve.
Very low back pain sometimes comes 
from problems in the uterus, ovaries, 
or rectum.
In older people, chronic back pain 
is often arthritis.
Pain in the upper right back may be 
from a gallbladder problem (p. 329).
Acute (or chronic) pain here may be a 
urinary problem (p. 234).
Low backache is normal for some 
women during menstrual periods or 
pregnancy (p. 248).
Standing or sitting with 
the shoulder drooped 
is a common cause of 
backache.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
174
Treatment and prevention of back pain:
♦ If back pain has a cause like TB, a urinary infection, or gallbladder disease, 
treat the cause. Seek medical help if you suspect a serious disease.
♦ Simple backache, including that of pregnancy, can often be prevented or made 
better by:
always standing straight
sleeping on a firm flat surface 
like this
like 
this
not 
like 
this
not like this
back-bending 
exercises (done 
very slowly)
Then, holding this shoulder 
down,
gently but steadily push this 
knee over so as to twist the 
back.
Do this first on one side and 
then the other.
Have the person lie
with one foot
tucked under
his knee.
♦ Aspirin and hot soaks (p. 195) help calm most kinds of back pain.
♦ For sudden, severe, low back pain that comes from twisting, lifting, bending, 
or straining, quick relief can sometimes be brought like this:
CAUTION: Do not try this if the back pain is from a fall or injury.
♦ If back pain from lifting or twisting is sudden and severe with knife-like pain when 
you bend over, if the pain goes into the leg(s), or if a foot becomes numb 
or weak, this is serious. A nerve coming 
from the back may be ‘pinched’ by a 
slipped disc (pad between the bones of 
the back). It is best to rest flat on your 
back for a few days. It may help to put 
something firm under the knees and 
mid back.
♦ Take aspirin and use hot soaks. If pain does not begin to get better in a few days, 
seek medical advice.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
175
VARICOSE VEINS
Varicose veins are veins that are swollen, twisted, and often painful. They are 
often seen on the legs of older people and of women who are pregnant or who have 
had many children.
Treatment:
There is no medicine for varicose veins. But the 
following will help:
♦	 Do not spend much time standing or sitting with your 
feet down. If you have no choice but to sit or stand for 
long periods, try to lie down with your feet up (above 
the level of the heart) for a few minutes every half hour. 
When standing, try to walk in place. Or, repeatedly lift 
your heels off the ground and put them back down. 
Also, sleep with your feet up (on pillows).
♦	 Use elastic stockings (support hose) or elastic bandages 
to help hold in the veins. Be sure to take them off at night.
♦	 Taking care of your veins in this way will help prevent chronic sores 
or varicose ulcers on the ankles (p. 213).
PILES (HEMORRHOIDS)
Piles or hemorrhoids are varicose veins of the anus or rectum, which feel like little 
lumps or balls. They may be painful, but are not dangerous. They frequently appear 
during pregnancy and may go away afterwards.
♦ Certain bitter plant juices (witch hazel, cactus, etc.) dabbed on hemorrhoids 
help shrink them. So do hemorrhoid suppositories (p. 391).
♦ Sitting in a bath of warm water can help the hemorrhoid heal.
♦ Piles may be caused in part by constipation. It helps to eat plenty 
of fruit or food with a lot of fiber, like cassava or bran.
♦ Very large hemorrhoids may require an 
operation. Get medical advice.
If a hemorrhoid begins to bleed, the bleeding 
can sometimes be controlled by pressing with 
a clean cloth directly on the hemorrhoid. If the 
bleeding still does not stop, seek medical advice. 
Or try to control the bleeding by removing the clot 
that is inside the swollen vein. 
First, clean the anus with soap and water. Use 
a blade that has been sterilized by boiling to cut 
a small opening in the hemorrhoid. Use sterilized 
tweezers to pull out the clot. Put pressure on the 
cut with a clean cloth until bleeding stops. 
CAUTION: Do not try to cut the hemorrhoid 
out. The person can bleed to death.
hemorrhoid
anus
blood clot
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
176
SWELLING OF THE FEET 
AND OTHER PARTS OF THE BODY
Swelling of the feet may be caused by a number of different problems, some minor 
and others serious. But if the face or other parts of the body are also swollen, this is 
usually a sign of serious illness.
Women’s feet sometimes swell during the last three months of pregnancy. This is 
usually not serious. It is caused by the weight of the child that presses on the veins 
coming from the legs in a way that limits the flow of blood. However, if the woman also 
has high blood pressure, swollen face, a lot of protein in her urine, or sudden weight 
gain, she may be suffering from pre-eclampsia (see p. 249). Seek medical 
help fast.
Old people who spend a lot of time sitting or standing in one place often get swollen 
feet because of poor circulation. However, swollen feet in older persons may also be 
due to heart trouble (p. 325) or, less commonly, kidney disease (p. 234).
Swelling of the feet in small children may result from anemia (p. 124) or malnutrition 
(p. 107). In severe cases of malnutrition the face and hands may also become swollen 
(see Kwashiorkor, p. 113).
Treatment:
To reduce swelling, treat the sickness that causes it. Use little or no salt in food. 
Herbal teas that make people urinate a lot usually help (see corn silk, p. 12). Also do 
the following:
WHEN YOUR FEET ARE SWOLLEN:
Do not spend time sitting with your feet 
down. This makes them swell more.
When you sit, put your 
feet up high. This way the 
swelling becomes less. Put 
your feet up several times 
a day. Your feet should be 
above the level of your heart.
Also sleep with your 
feet raised.
NO
GOOD
BETTER
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
177
HERNIA (RUPTURE)
A hernia is an opening or tear in the muscles covering the belly. This permits a 
loop of gut to push through and form a lump under the skin. Hernias usually come 
from lifting something heavy, or straining (as during childbirth). Some babies are 
born with a hernia (see p. 317). In men, hernias are common in the groin. Swollen 
lymph nodes (p. 88) may also cause lumps in the groin. However . . .
Lift heavy 
things like this
not
like this.
How to
prevent a hernia:
Put a little 
cushion here
so it presses
against the groin.
PLAN FOR A SIMPLE TRUSS:
It gets bigger when you 
cough (or lift).
and do not get bigger 
when you cough.
Lymph nodes are 
usually here
and you can feel it with a 
finger, like this.
A hernia is 
usually here,
How to live with a hernia:
♦ Avoid lifting heavy objects.
♦ Make a truss to hold the hernia in.
          
CAUTION: If a hernia suddenly becomes large or painful, try to make it go back in 
by lying with the feet higher than the head and pressing gently on the bulge. If it will 
not go back, seek medical help.
If the hernia becomes very painful and causes vomiting, and the person 
cannot have a bowel movement, this can be very dangerous. Surgery 
may be necessary. Seek medical help fast. In the meantime, treat as for 
Appendicitis (p. 95).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
178
seizures (FITS, CONVULSIONS)
We say a person has a seizure when he suddenly loses consciousness and makes 
strange, jerking movements (convulsions). Seizures come from a problem in the brain. In 
small children, common causes of seizures are high fever and severe dehydration. In 
very ill persons, the cause may be meningitis, malaria of the brain (cerebral malaria), 
or poisoning. In pregnant women, it may be eclampsia (see p. 249). A person who 
often has seizures may have epilepsy.
♦ Try to figure out the cause of a seizure and treat it, if possible.
♦ If the child has a high fever, lower it with cool water (see p. 76). 
♦ If the child is dehydrated, give an enema of Rehydration Drink slowly. 
Send for medical help. Give nothing by mouth during a seizure.
♦ If there are signs of meningitis (p. 185), begin treatment at once. Seek medical help.
♦ If you suspect cerebral malaria, inject quinine or artesunate (see p. 366).
♦ If you suspect eclampsia, give medicine (see p. 390).
EPILEPSY
Epilepsy causes seizures (fits) in people who otherwise seem fairly healthy. Seizures 
may come hours, days, weeks, or months apart. In some persons they cause loss 
of consciousness and violent movements. The eyes often roll back. In mild types of 
epilepsy the person may suddenly ‘blank out’ a moment, make strange movements, or 
behave oddly. Epilepsy is more common in some families (inherited). Or it may come 
from brain damage at birth, high fever in infancy, or tapeworm cysts in the brain  
(p. 143). Epilepsy is not an infection and cannot be ‘caught’. It is often a life-long 
problem. However, babies sometimes get over it.
Medicines to prevent epileptic seizures:
Note: These do not ‘cure’ epilepsy; they help prevent seizures. Often the medicine must 
be taken for life.
♦ Phenobarbital often controls epilepsy. It costs little (see p. 389).
♦ Phenytoin may work when phenobarbital does not. Use the lowest 
possible dose that prevents seizures (see p. 389).
When a person is having a seizure:
♦ Try to keep the person from hurting himself: 
move away all hard or sharp objects.
♦ Put nothing in the person’s mouth while he is having 
a seizure—no food, drink, medicine, nor 
any object to prevent biting the tongue.
♦ After the seizure the person may be dull 
and sleepy. Let him sleep.
♦ If a seizure lasts more than 15 minutes, put liquid diazepam in the anus using a 
plastic syringe without a needle. For dosage see page 389. Do not inject phenytoin, 
phenobarbitol, or diazepam into the muscles. These medicines can be injected in 
the vein, but it is very dangerous if you have little experience. Only a person with 
experience giving injections into a vein should give injections of these medicines.
For more information on seizures, see Disabled Village Children, Chapter 29.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
179
The diseases covered in this chapter are often difficult or impossible to cure 
without medical help. Many need special medicines that are difficult to get in 
rural areas. Home remedies will not cure them. If a person has one of these 
illnesses, THE SOONER HE GETS MEDICAL HELP, THE BETTER HIS CHANCE 
OF GETTING WELL.
CAUTION: Many of the illnesses covered in other chapters may also be serious and 
require medical assistance. See the Signs of Dangerous Illness, p. 42.
TUBERCULOSIS (TB, CONSUMPTION)
Tuberculosis of the lungs is a chronic (long-lasting), contagious (easily spread) 
disease that anyone can get. But it often strikes persons between 15 and 35 years 
of age—especially those who are weak, poorly nourished, have HIV, or live with 
someone who has TB. Because so many people with HIV (p. 399) get very sick with 
TB, all people with HIV should get a TB test. People with HIV can take isoniazid (see 
p. 360) to prevent TB from developing. Encourage people with TB to also be tested 
for HIV and find help with a treatment program if they are positive.
Tuberculosis is curable. Yet thousands die needlessly from this disease every 
year. Both for prevention and cure, it is very important to treat tuberculosis early. 
Be on the lookout for the signs of tuberculosis. A person may have one or many 
of them.
Most frequent signs of TB:
•	 A cough that lasts longer than 3 weeks, often worse just after 
waking up.
•	 Slight fever in the evening and sweating at night.
•	 There may be pain in the chest or upper back.
•	 Chronic loss of weight and increasing weakness.
In serious or advanced cases:
•	 Coughing up blood (usually a little, but in some cases a lot).
•	 Pale, waxy skin. The skin of a dark skinned person tends to 
get lighter, especially the face.
•	 Voice grows hoarse (very serious).
In young children: The cough may come late. Instead, look for:
•	 Steady weight loss.
•	 Frequent fever.
•	 Lighter skin color.
•	 Swellings in the neck (lymph nodes), or the belly (p. 20).
TB is usually only in the lungs. But it can affect any part of the body. In young 
children it may cause meningitis (see p. 185). For skin problems from TB, see p. 212.
14
CHAPTER
Serious Illnesses that Need
Special Medical Attention
180
If you think you might have tuberculosis: 
Seek medical help. At the first sign of tuberculosis, go to a health center where the 
workers can examine you, and test the stuff you cough up (phlegm or sputum) to see 
if you have TB or not. Many governments give TB medicines free. Ask at the nearest 
health center. You will probably be given some of the following medicines:
♦ Isoniazid (INH) pills (p. 360)
♦ Rifampin pills (p. 360).
♦ Pyrazinamide pills (p. 361)
It is very important to take the medicines as directed. Treatments may be different 
in different countries, but usually the treatment has 2 parts. You will take 4 medicines 
for 2 months and then test your sputum. If you are getting better, you will take 2 or 3 
medicines for another 4 months. Then you will be tested again to make sure you are 
cured. Do not stop taking the medicines, even if you feel better. This can lead to the 
illness coming back and infecting you and other people, with a form of TB that is much 
harder to cure, multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (see p. 361). To cure TB completely 
can take from 6 months to more than a year.
Eat as well as possible: plenty of energy foods and also foods rich in proteins and 
vitamins (p. 110 to 111). Rest is important. If possible, stop working and take it easy 
until you begin to get better. From then on, try not to work so hard that you become tired 
or breathe with difficulty. Try to always get enough rest and sleep.
Tuberculosis in any other part of the body is treated 
the same as TB of the lungs, but the treatment may be 
longer. This includes TB in the glands of the neck, TB of the 
abdomen (see picture on p. 20), TB of the skin (see p. 212), 
and TB of a joint (like the knee). A child with severe TB of the 
backbone may also need surgery to prevent paralysis (see 
Disabled Village Children, Chapter 21).
Tuberculosis is very contagious. It spreads when 
someone with TB coughs germs into the air. Anyone, 
especially a child, who lives with someone who has TB  
runs a great risk of catching the disease.
If someone in the house has TB:
♦	 If possible, see that the whole family is tested for TB (Tuberculin test).
♦	 Have the children vaccinated against TB with B.C.G. vaccine.
♦	 Everyone, especially the children, should eat plenty of nutritious food.
♦	 The person with TB should eat and sleep separately from the children, if possible 
in a different room, as long as he has any cough at all.
♦	 Ask the person with TB to cover his mouth when coughing and not spit on the floor.
♦	 Watch for weight loss and other signs of TB in members of the family. 
Weigh each person, especially the children, once a month, until you are sure no 
one in the household is sick with TB.
TB in family members often starts very slowly and quietly. If anyone in the family 
shows signs of TB, have tests done and begin treatment at once.
♦ Ethambutol pills (p. 361)
♦ Streptomycin injections (p. 361)
TB of
the backbone
Early and full treatment is a key part of prevention.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
181
RABIES
Rabies comes from the bite of 
a rabid or ‘mad’ animal, usually a 
rabid dog, cat, fox, wolf, skunk, 
or jackal. Bats and other animals 
may also spread rabies.
Signs of rabies:
In the animal:
•	 Acts strangely—sometimes 
sad, restless, or irritable.
•	 Foaming at the mouth, cannot eat or drink.
•	 Sometimes the animal goes wild (mad) and may bite anyone or anything 
nearby.
•	 The animal dies within 5 to 7 days.
Signs in people:
•	 Pain and tingling in the area of the bite.
•	 Irregular breathing, as if the person has just been crying.
•	 Pain and difficulty swallowing, and fear of liquids. A lot of thick, sticky saliva.
•	 The person is alert, but very nervous or excitable. Fits of anger can occur.
•	 As death nears, seizures (convulsions) and paralysis.
If you have any reason to believe an animal that has bitten someone has rabies:
♦ 	 Tie or cage the animal for a week.
♦ 	 Clean the bite well with soap, water, and hydrogen peroxide. Do not close the 
wound; leave it open.
♦ 	 If the animal dies before the week is up (or if it was killed or cannot be 
caught), take the bitten person at once to a health center where he can be 
given a series of anti-rabies injections.
The first symptoms of rabies appear from 10 days up to 2 years after the bite 
(usually within 3 to 7 weeks). Treatment must begin before the first signs of the 
sickness appear. Once the sickness begins, no treatment known to medical science 
can save the person’s life.
Prevention:
♦ 	 Kill and bury (or cage for one week) any animal suspected of having rabies.
♦ 	 Cooperate with programs to vaccinate dogs.
♦ 	 Keep children far away from any animal that seems sick or acts strangely.
Take great care in handling any animal that seems sick or acts strangely.
Even if it does not bite anyone, its saliva can cause rabies
if it gets into a cut or scratch.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
182
TETANUS (LOCKJAW)
Tetanus results when a germ that lives in the feces of animals or people enters the 
body through a wound. Deep or dirty wounds are especially dangerous.
WOUNDS VERY LIKELY TO CAUSE TETANUS
CAUSES OF TETANUS IN THE NEWBORN CHILD
Tetanus germs enter through the 
umbilical cord of a newborn baby because 
of lack of cleanliness or failure to take 
other simple precautions. The chance of 
tetanus is greater . . .
•	 when the cord has been cut with  
an instrument that has not been 
boiled and kept completely clean, or 
•	 when the cord has not been cut 
close to the body (see p. 262), or 
•	 when the newly cut cord is tightly 
covered or is not kept dry.
animal bites, especially 
those of dogs and pigs
gunshot and 
knife wounds
holes made with 
dirty needles
injuries caused 
by barbed wire
puncture wounds 
from thorns, 
splinters, or nails
WHEN THE CORD IS CUT A 
LONG WAY FROM THE BODY, 
LIKE THIS, THE CHANCE OF 
TETANUS IS GREATER.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
183
Signs of tetanus:
•	 An infected wound (sometimes no wound can be found).
•	 Discomfort and difficulty in swallowing.
•	 The jaw gets stiff (lockjaw), then the muscles of the neck and other parts 
of the body get stiff. The person has difficulty walking normally.
•	 Painful convulsions (sudden tightening) of the jaw and finally of the whole 
body. Moving or touching the person may trigger sudden spasms like this:
Sudden noise or 
bright light may 
also bring on these 
spasms.
With the leg hanging freely, 
tap the knee with a knuckle 
just below the kneecap.
If the leg jumps 
just a little bit, the 
reaction is normal.
If the leg jumps high, this indicates a 
serious illness like tetanus (or perhaps 
meningitis or poisoning with certain 
medicines or rat poison).
This test is especially useful when you suspect tetanus in a newborn baby.
In the newborn, the first signs of tetanus generally appear 3 to 10 days after 
birth. The child begins to cry continuously and is unable to suck. Often the 
umbilical area is dirty or infected. After several hours or days, lockjaw and the other 
signs of tetanus begin.
It is very important to start treating tetanus at the first sign. If you suspect tetanus 
(or if a newborn child cries continuously or stops nursing), make this test:
TEST OF KNEE REFLEXES
What to do when there are signs of tetanus:
Tetanus is a deadly disease. Seek medical help at the first sign. If there is any 
delay in getting help, do the following things:
♦	 Examine the whole body for infected wounds or sores. Often the wound will 
contain pus. Open the wound and wash it with soap and cool, boiled water; 
completely remove all dirt, pus, thorns, splinters, etc.; flood the wound with 
hydrogen peroxide if you have any.
(continued on the next page)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
184
What to do when there are signs of tetanus: (continued)
♦	 Inject 1 million units of procaine penicillin at once and repeat every 12 hours 
(p. 352). (For newborn babies crystalline penicillin is better.) If there is no 
penicillin, use another antibiotic, like tetracycline.
♦	 If you can get it, inject 5,000 units of Human Immune Globulin or 40,000 to 
50,000 units of Tetanus Antitoxin. Be sure to follow all the precautions (see p. 70 
and 388). Human Immune Globulin has less risk of severe allergic reaction, but 
may be more expensive and harder to obtain.
♦	 As long as the person can swallow, give nutritious liquids in frequent small sips.
♦	 To control convulsions, give diazepam (Valium) by mouth or in the rectum (for 
dosages see p. 389 and 390).
♦	 Touch and move the person as little as possible. Avoid noise and bright light.
♦	 If necessary, use a catheter (rubber tube) connected to a syringe to suck the 
mucus from the nose and throat. This helps clear the airway.
♦	 For the newborn with tetanus, if possible, have a health worker or doctor put in a 
nose-to-stomach tube and feed the baby the mother’s breast milk. This provides 
needed nutrition and fights infection.
How to prevent tetanus:
Even in the best hospitals, half the people with tetanus die. It is much easier to 
prevent tetanus than to treat it.
♦	 Vaccination: This is the surest protection against tetanus. Both children and 
adults should be vaccinated. Vaccinate your whole family at the nearest health 
center (see p. 147). For complete protection, the vaccination should be repeated 
once every 10 years. Vaccinating women against tetanus each time they are 
pregnant will prevent tetanus in newborn infants (see p. 250).
♦	 When you have a wound, especially a dirty or deep wound, clean and take care 
of it in the manner described on page 89.
♦	 If the wound is very big, deep, or dirty, seek medical help. If you have not been 
vaccinated against tetanus, take penicillin. Also consider getting an injection of 
an antitoxin for tetanus (see p. 388).
♦	 In newborn babies, cleanliness is very important to prevent tetanus. The 
instrument used to cut the umbilical cord should be sterilized (p. 262); the cord 
should be cut short, and the umbilical area kept clean and dry.
THIS BABY’S CORD WAS CUT 
SHORT, KEPT DRY, AND LEFT OPEN 
TO THE AIR.
THIS BABY’S CORD WAS LEFT 
LONG, KEPT TIGHTLY COVERED, 
AND NOT KEPT DRY.
HE DIED OF TETANUS.
HE STAYED HEALTHY.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
185
MENINGITIS
This is a very serious infection of the brain, more common in children. It may 
begin as a complication of another illness, such as measles, mumps, whooping 
cough, malaria, or an ear infection. Children of mothers who have tuberculosis 
sometimes get tubercular meningitis in the first few months of life.
Signs:
•	 Fever
•	 Severe headache.
•	 Stiff neck. The child looks 
very ill, and lies with his head 
and neck bent back, like this:
•	 The back is too stiff to put the 
head between the knees.
•	 In babies under a year old: the fontanel (soft spot on top of the head) 
bulges out.
•	 Vomiting is common.
•	 In babies and young children, early meningitis may be hard to recognize. 
The child may cry in a strange way (the ‘meningitis cry’), even when the 
mother puts the child on her breast. Or the child may become very sleepy.
•	 Sometimes there are seizures (fits, convulsions) or strange movements.
•	 The child often gets worse and worse and only becomes quiet when he 
loses consciousness completely.
•	 Tubercular meningitis develops slowly, over days or weeks. Other forms of 
meningitis come on more quickly, in hours or days.
Treatment:
Get medical help fast—every minute counts! If possible take the person to 
a hospital. Meanwhile:
♦ 	 Inject ampicillin every 6 hours, 500 mg. for children or 1 g. for adults (see 
p. 352). If possible, also give chloramphenicol (see p. 356).
♦ 	 If there is high fever (more than 40°), lower it with wet cloths and 
acetaminophen or aspirin (see p. 378 to 379).
♦ 	 If the mother has tuberculosis or if you have any other reason to suspect 
that the child has tubercular meningitis, inject him with 20 mg. of 
streptomycin for each kg. he weighs and get medical help at once. Also, 
use ampicillin in case the meningitis is not from TB.
♦ 	 If you know the meningitis came from malaria, give an injection of 
artesunate or quinine at once (see p. 366).
Prevention:
For prevention of tubercular meningitis, newborn babies of mothers with 
tuberculosis should be vaccinated with B.C.G. at birth. Dose for the newborn is 
0.05 ml. (half the normal dose of 0.1 ml.). For other suggestions on prevention of 
TB, see pages 179 to 180.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
186
MALARIA
Malaria is an infection of the blood that causes chills and high fever. Malaria is 
spread by mosquitos. The mosquito sucks up the malaria parasites in the blood of an 
infected person and injects them into the next person it bites. People with HIV are twice 
as likely to catch malaria.
Signs of malaria:
•	 The typical attack has 3 stages:
•	 Usually malaria causes fevers every 2 or 3 days (depending on the kind of malaria), 
but in the beginning it may cause fever daily. Also, the fever pattern may not be 
regular or typical. For this reason anyone who suffers from unexplained fevers 
should have his blood tested for malaria.
•	 Chronic malaria often causes a large spleen and anemia (see p. 124). For people 
with HIV (p. 399) it can cause them to get sick faster.
•	 In young children, anemia and paleness can begin within a day or two. In children 
with malaria affecting the brain (cerebral malaria), seizures (fits) may be followed 
by periods of unconsciousness. Also, the palms may show a blue gray color, and 
breathing may be rapid and deep. (Note: Children who have not been breastfed are 
more likely to get malaria.)
Analysis and treatment:
♦ 	 If you suspect malaria or have repeated fevers, if possible go to a health center for a 
blood test. In areas where an especially dangerous type of malaria called falciparum 
occurs, seek treatment immediately.
♦ 	 In areas where malaria is common and blood tests are not available, treat any 
unexplained high fever as malaria. Take the malaria medicine known to work 
best in your area. (See pages 363 to 367 for dosages and information on malaria 
medicines.)
♦ 	 If you get better with the medicine, but after several days the fevers start again, you 
may need another medicine. Get advice from the nearest health center.
♦ 	 If a person who possibly has malaria begins to have seizures or other signs of 
meningitis (p. 185) he may have cerebral malaria. If possible, inject quinine or 
artesunate at once (see p. 366).
1. It begins with 
chills—and often 
headache. The person 
shivers or shakes for 
15 minutes to an hour.
2. Chills are followed by fever, 
often 40° or more. The person is 
weak, flushed (red skin), and at 
times delirious (not in his right 
mind). The fever lasts several 
hours or days.
3. Finally the person 
begins to sweat, and 
his temperature goes 
down. After an attack, 
the person feels weak, 
but may feel more or 
less OK.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
187
HOW TO AVOID MALARIA (AND DENGUE)
Malaria occurs more often during hot, rainy seasons. If everyone cooperates, it 
can be controlled. All these control measures should be practiced at once.
1. Avoid mosquitos. 
Sleep where there 
are no mosquitos 
or underneath a 
bed net treated with 
insecticide or under 
a sheet. Cover the 
baby’s cradle with treated 
mosquito netting or a thin cloth.
2. Cooperate with the malaria 
control workers 
when they come 
to your village. Tell 
them if anyone 
in the family has 
had fevers and let 
them take blood 
for testing.
3. If you suspect malaria, get 
treatment quickly. After you have 
been treated, 
mosquitos 
that bite you 
will not pass 
malaria on to 
others.
4. Destroy mosquitos and their young. Mosquitos 
breed in water that is not flowing. Clear ponds, 
pits, old cans, or broken 
pots that collect water. Raise 
mosquito-eating fish in 
ponds or lakes. Fill the tops 
of bamboo posts with sand 
and keep water containers 
covered.
5. Malaria can also be prevented, or its effects greatly reduced, by taking anti‑malaria 
medicines on a regular schedule. See pages 363 to 367.
DENGUE (BREAKBONE FEVER, DANDY FEVER)
This illness is sometimes confused with malaria. It is caused by a virus that is 
spread by mosquitos. In recent years it has become much more common in many 
countries. It often occurs in epidemics (many persons get it at the same time), 
usually during the hot, rainy season. A person can get dengue more than once. 
Repeat illnesses are often worse. To prevent dengue, control mosquitos and protect 
against their bites, as described above.
Signs:
•	 Sudden high fever with chills.
•	 Severe body aches, headache, sore throat.
•	 Person feels very ill, weak, miserable.
•	 After 3 to 4 days person feels better for a few hours to 2 days.
•	 Then illness returns for 1 or 2 days, often with a rash that begins on hands  
and feet.
•	 The rash then spreads to arms, legs, and finally the body (usually not the face).
A severe form of dengue may cause bleeding into the skin (small dark spots), or 
dangerous bleeding inside the body. Go to a hospital immediately.
Treatment:
♦	 No medicine cures it, but the illness goes away by itself in a few days.
♦	 Rest, lots of liquids such as rehydration drink, fruit juice, or milk, 
acetaminophen (but not aspirin or ibuprofen) for fever and pain.
♦ 	 In case of severe bleeding, treat for shock, if necessary (see p. 77).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
188
BRUCELLOSIS (UNDULANT FEVER, MALTA FEVER)
This is a disease that comes from drinking fresh milk from infected cows or goats. 
It may also enter the body through scrapes or wounds in the skin of persons who work 
with sick cattle, goats, or pigs, or by breathing it into the lungs.
PREVENT BRUCELLOSIS:
NEVER DRINK
UNBOILED MILK
Signs:
•	 Brucellosis may start with fever and chills, but it often begins very gradually with 
increasing tiredness, weakness, loss of appetite, headache, stomach ache, and 
sometimes joint pains.
•	 The fevers may be mild or severe. Typically, these begin with afternoon chills 
and end with sweating in the early morning. In chronic brucellosis, the fevers 
may stop for several days and then return. Without treatment, brucellosis may 
last for years.
•	 There may be swollen lymph nodes in the neck, armpits, and groin (p. 88).
Treatment:
♦	 If you suspect brucellosis, get medical advice, because it is easy to confuse this 
disease with others, and the treatment is long and expensive.
♦	 Treat with tetracycline, adults: two 250 mg. capsules 4 times a day for 3 
weeks. For precautions, see page 356. Or use cotrimoxazole. (For dosage and 
precautions, see p. 357.)
Prevention:
♦	 Drink only cow’s or goat’s milk that has been boiled or pasteurized. In areas 
where brucellosis is a problem, it is safer not to eat cheese made from unboiled 
milk.
♦	 Be careful when handling cattle, goats, and pigs, especially if you have any cuts 
or scrapes.
♦	 Cooperate with livestock inspectors who check to be sure your animals are 
healthy.
TYPHOID FEVER
Typhoid is an infection of the gut that affects the whole body. It is spread from 
feces‑to‑mouth in contaminated food and water and often comes in epidemics 
(many people sick at once). Of the different infections sometimes called ‘the fever’ 
(see p. 26), typhoid is one of the most dangerous.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
189
Signs of typhoid:
First week:
•	 It begins like a cold or flu.
•	 Headache, sore throat, and often a 
dry cough.
•	 The fever goes up and down, but rises 
a little more each day until it reaches 
40° or more.
•	 Pulse is often relatively slow for the 
amount of fever present. Take the 
pulse and temperature every half hour. 
If the pulse gets slower when the 
fever goes up, the person probably 
has typhoid (see p. 26).
•	 Sometimes there is vomiting, diarrhea, 
or constipation.
Second week:
•	 High fever, pulse relatively slow.
•	 A few pink spots may appear on the body.
•	 Trembling.
•	 Delirium (person does not think clearly  
or make sense).
•	 Weakness, weight loss, dehydration.
Treatment:
♦	 Seek medical help.
♦	 Give ciprofloxacin (p. 356), chloramphenicol (p. 356), ampicillin (p. 352), or 
cotrimoxazole (p. 357). Ask a health worker which medicine works best where 
you live. 
♦	 Lower the fever with cool wet cloths (see p. 76).
♦	 Give plenty of liquids: soups, juices, and Rehydration Drink to avoid dehydration 
(see p. 152).
♦	 Give nutritious foods, in liquid form if necessary.
♦	 The person should stay in bed until the fever is completely gone.
♦	 If the person shits blood or develops signs of peritonitis (p. 94) or pneumonia 
(p. 171), take her to a hospital at once.
Prevention:
♦	 To prevent typhoid, care must be taken to avoid contamination of water and 
food by human feces. Follow the guidelines of personal and public hygiene in 
Chapter 12. Make and use latrines. Be sure latrines are a safe distance from 
where people get drinking water.
♦	 Cases of typhoid often appear after a flood or other disaster, and special care 
must be taken with cleanliness at these times. Be sure drinking water is clean. 
If there are cases of typhoid in your village, all drinking water should be boiled. 
Look for the cause of contaminated water or food.
(continued on the next page)
Third week:
•	If there are no complications, 
the fever and other symptoms 
slowly go away.
1st day
2nd day
3rd day
4th day
5th day
6th day
37½° C
38°
38½°
39°
39½°
40°
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
190
Prevention of typhoid: (continued)
♦ 	 To avoid the spread of typhoid, a person who has the disease should stay in 
a separate room. No one else should eat or drink from the dishes he uses. His 
stools should be burned or buried in deep holes. Persons who care for him 
should wash their hands right afterwards.
♦ 	 After recovering from typhoid some persons still carry the disease and can 
spread it to others. So anyone who has had typhoid should be extra careful with 
personal cleanliness and should not work in restaurants or where food is handled. 
Sometimes ampicillin is effective in treating typhoid carriers.
TYPHUS
Typhus is an illness similar to but different from typhoid. The infection is transmitted 
by bites of:
lice
ticks
rat fleas
Signs:
•	 Typhus begins like a bad cold. After a week or more fever begins, with chills, 
headache, and pain in the muscles and chest.
•	 After a few days of fever a typical rash appears, first in the armpits and then on 
the body, then the arms and legs (but not on the face, palms of the hands, or 
soles of the feet). The rash looks like many tiny bruises.
•	 The fever lasts 2 weeks or more. Typhus is usually mild in children and very 
severe in old people. An epidemic form of typhus is especially dangerous.
•	 In typhus spread by ticks, there is often a large painful sore at the point of the 
bite, and the lymph nodes near the bite are swollen and painful.
Treatment:
♦ 	 If you think someone may have typhus, get medical advice. Special tests are 
often needed.
♦ 	 Give tetracycline, adults: 2 capsules of 250 mg. 4 times a day for 7 days (see 
p. 355). Chloramphenicol also works, but is riskier (p. 356).
Prevention:
♦ 	 Keep clean. De‑louse the whole family regularly.
♦ 	 Remove ticks from your dogs and do not allow dogs in your house.
♦ 	 Kill rats. Use cats or traps (not poison, which can be dangerous to other animals 
and children).
♦ 	 Kill rat fleas. Do not handle dead 
rats. The fleas may jump off onto you. 
Drown and burn the rats and their 
fleas. Put insecticide into rat holes 
and nests.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
191
LEPROSY (HANSEN’S DISEASE)
This mildly infectious disease develops slowly, often over many years. It can only 
spread from persons who have untreated leprosy, to persons who have low resistance 
to the disease. In areas where leprosy is common, children should be checked every 
6 to 12 months—especially children living with persons who have leprosy.
Signs: Leprosy can cause a variety of skin problems, loss of feeling, and paralysis of 
the hands and feet.
The first sign of leprosy is 
often a slowly growing patch 
on the skin that does not 
itch or hurt. At first, feeling 
inside the patch may be 
normal. Keep watching it. If 
feeling in the patch becomes 
reduced or absent (see p. 38) 
it is probably leprosy.
Later signs differ according to the person’s natural resistance to the disease. 
Watch out for:
•	 Tingling, numbness or 
loss of feeling in hands 
or feet. Or deformities 
or loss of feeling in skin 
patches.
•	 Slight weakness or 
deformities in the hands  
and feet.
•	 Swollen nerves that form thick 
cords under the skin. Nerves 
may or may not be painful 
when you press them.
Advanced sign may include:
Treatment of leprosy: Leprosy is usually curable, but medicine must usually be taken 
for years. The best medicine is dapsone, combined with 1 or 2 other medicines (see 
pages 362 to 363). If a ‘lepra reaction’ (fever, a rash, pain and perhaps swelling of 
hands and feet, or eye damage) occurs or gets worse while taking the medicine, 
keep taking it but get medical help.
clawed 
toes
drop foot
Check for
thick nerves in 
these places.
Examine the whole body for skin patches, especially the face, arms, 
back, butt, and legs.
Patches are a different color from 
surrounding skin, but never
completely white or scaly.
ringworm‑like patch with or 
without raised border
pale patch 
without 
clear 
border
burns and scars where 
feeling has been lost
ear lobe 
thick and 
lumpy
nose 
sometimes 
deformed
loss of 
eyebrows
painless sores on 
hands or feet
paralysis
and deformity 
of the hands 
and feet
blindness
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
192
2. At the end of each day (or more often if you work hard or walk far) examine your 
hands and feet very carefully—or have someone else examine them. Look for cuts, 
bruises, or thorns. Also look for spots or areas on the hands and feet that are red, hot, 
swollen or show the beginnings of blisters. If you find any of these, rest the hands or 
feet until the skin is completely normal again. This will help callous and strengthen the 
skin. Sores can be prevented.
3. If you have an open sore, keep the part with the sore very clean and at rest until it 
has completely healed. Take great care not to injure the area again.
4. Protect your eyes. Much eye damage comes from not blinking enough, because 
of weakness or loss of feeling. Blink your eyes often to keep them wet and clean. If you 
cannot blink well, close your eyes tightly often during the day, especially when dust 
blows. Wear sun glasses with side shades, and maybe a sun hat. Keep 
eyes clean and flies away.
If you do these things and begin treatment early, most deformities with leprosy 
can be prevented. For more information about Hansen’s disease, see Disabled Village 
Children, Chapter 26.
Prevention of damage to hands, feet, and eyes: The large open sores often seen on 
the hands and feet of persons with leprosy are not caused by the disease itself and 
can be prevented. They result because, when feeling has been lost, a person no 
longer protects himself against injury.
For example, if a person with normal feeling walks a long way and gets a blister, 
it hurts, so he stops walking or limps.
1. Protect hands and feet from things that can cut, bruise, 
blister, or burn them:
Do not go barefoot, especially not where there are sharp 
stones or thorns. Wear shoes or sandals. Put soft padding 
inside shoes and under straps that may rub.
When working or cooking meals, wear gloves. 
Never pick up an object that might be hot without 
first protecting your hand with a thick glove or 
folded cloth. If possible, avoid work that involves 
handling sharp or hot objects. Do not smoke.
But when a person with 
leprosy gets a blister, it 
does not hurt.
Still without pain, the 
infection gets deeper 
and attacks the bone.
So he keeps walking 
until the blister bursts 
and becomes infected.
In time the bone is destroyed 
and the foot becomes more 
and more deformed.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
193
Some skin problems are caused by diseases or irritations that affect the skin 
only—such as ringworm, diaper rash, or warts. Other skin problems are signs of 
diseases that affect the whole body—such as the rash of measles or the sore, dry 
patches of pellagra (malnutrition).  Certain kinds of sores or skin conditions may be 
signs of serious diseases—like tuberculosis, syphilis, leprosy, or HIV infection.
This chapter deals only with the more common skin problems in rural areas. 
However, there are hundreds of diseases of the skin.  Some look so much alike that 
they are hard to tell apart—yet their causes and the specific treatments they require 
may be quite different.
CHAPTER
15
RULE #2
If the affected area itches, 
stings, or oozes clear fluid, 
treat it with cold.  Put cool, wet 
cloths on it (cold compresses).
RULE #1
If the affected area is hot and 
painful, or oozes pus, treat it 
with heat.  Put hot, moist cloths 
on it (hot compresses).
If a skin problem is serious or gets worse
 in spite of treatment, seek medical help.
Skin Problems
Many skin problems can be helped by keeping the body clean. Try to wash once 
a day with mild soap and clean water. If the skin becomes too dry, wash less often 
and do not use soap every time. Try rubbing petroleum gel (Vaseline), glycerin, or 
vegetable oils into the skin after bathing. Wear loose cotton clothing.
GENERAL RULES FOR TREATING SKIN PROBLEMS
Although many skin problems need specific treatment, there are a few general 
measures that often help:
194
RULE #2 (in greater detail)
If the affected skin forms blisters or a 
crust, oozes, itches, stings, or burns, do 
the following:
♦  Apply cloths soaked in cool water 
with white vinegar (2 tablespoons of 
vinegar in 1 quart of pure of boiled 
water).
♦  When the affected area feels better, 
no longer oozes, and has formed 
tender new skin, lightly spread on a 
mixture of talc and water (1 part talc 
to 1 part water).
♦  When healing has taken place, and 
the new skin begins to thicken or 
flake, rub on a little vegetable lard or 
body oil to soften it.
RULE #1 (in greater detail)
If the skin shows signs of serious infection such as:
•  inflammation (redness or darkening of skin around the affected areas)
•  swelling
•  pain
•  heat (it feels hot)
•  pus
Do the following:
♦  Keep the affected part still and elevate 
it (put it higher than the rest of the 
body).
♦  Apply hot, moist cloths.
♦  If the infection is severe or the person 
has a fever, give antibiotics (penicillin, 
a sulfonamide, or erythromycin).
Danger signs include: swollen lymph nodes, a red or dark line above the infected 
area, or a bad smell.  If these do not get better with treatment use an antibiotic and 
seek medical help quickly.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
195
Instructions for Using Hot Compresses (Hot Soaks)
1. Boil water and allow it to cool until you 
can just hold your hand in it.
2.	 Fold a clean cloth so it is slightly larger 
than the area you want to treat, wet the 
cloth in the hot water, and squeeze out 
the extra water.
3.	 Put the cloth over the affected 
skin.
4.	 Cover the cloth with a sheet of 
thin plastic or cellophane.
5.	 Wrap it with a towel to hold in 
the heat.
6.	 Keep the affected part raised.
7.	 When the cloth starts to cool, 
put it back in the hot water 
and repeat.
RULE #3
If the skin areas affected 
are on parts of the body 
often exposed to sunlight, 
protect them from the sun.
RULE #4
If the skin areas most affected are 
usually covered by clothing, expose 
them to direct sunlight for 10 to 20 
minutes, 2 or 3 times a day.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
196
SKIN PROBLEMS—A Guide to Identification
IF THE SKIN
HAS:
AND LOOKS
LIKE:
YOU MAY
HAVE:
SEE
PAGE:
small or
pimple-like
sores
Tiny bumps or sores with much 
itching—first between fingers, 
on the wrists, or the waist.
scabies
199
201
202
211
237
238
403
213
127
214
191
406
202
278
279
279
88
227
88
infection
from bacteria
impetigo
(bacterial
infection)
acne,
pimples,
blackheads
syphilis
venereal
lymphogranuloma
chancroid
ulcers from bad
circulation
(possibly
diabetes)
bed sores
leprosy
leishmaniasis
abscess or boil
mastitis
(bacterial
infection),
possibly cancer
cancer
(also see
lymph nodes)
river blindness
(also see
lymph nodes)
Pimples or sores with pus or
inflammation, often from
scratching insect bites. May
cause swollen lymph nodes.
Irregular, spreading sores
with shiny, yellow crusts.
Pimples on young people’s faces,
sometimes chest and back,
often with small heads of pus.
A sore on the genitals.
without itching or pain.
with pain and pus.
A large chronic (unhealing) sore surrounded
by purplish skin—on or near the ankles of
older people with varicose veins.
Sores over the bones and joints
of very sick persons who cannot
get out of bed.
Sores with loss of feeling on the
feet or hands. (They do not hurt
even when pricked with a needle.)
A bump and then a sore that will not
heal, anywhere on the body or face.
A warm, painful swelling
that eventually may break
open and drain pus.
A warm, painful lump in
the breast of a woman
breastfeeding.
A lump that keeps growing.
Usually not painful at first.
One or more round lumps on the
head, neck, or upper body (or 
central body and thighs).
a large, open
sore or
skin ulcer
lumps under
the skin
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
197
A Guide to Identification
IF THE SKIN
HAS:
AND LOOKS
LIKE:
YOU MAY
HAVE:
SEE
PAGE:
swollen
lymph nodes
Nodes on the side of the neck
that continuously break open
and scar.
Nodes in the groin that
continuously break open
and scar.
Dark patches on the forehead and
cheeks of pregnant women.
large spots
or patches
Scaly, cracking areas
that look like sunburn
on the arms, legs, neck,
or face.
dark
Dark spots on the skin or in the mouth 
that start small and then grow. They look 
like swollen bruises. They are painless.
Purple spots or peeling sores
on children with swollen feet.
Round or irregular patches
on the face or body,
especially of children.
white
White patches,
especially on
hands, feet,
or lips.
Reddish or blistering patches on
the cheeks or behind the knees
and elbows of young children.
A reddish, hot, painful
area that spreads rapidly.
reddish
A reddish area between
the baby’s legs.
Beef-red patches with white,
milky curds in the skin folds.
Raised reddish or gray
patches with silvery scales;
especially on elbows and
knees; chronic (long-term).
reddish
or gray
that begin with reddish
or bluish pimples.
that begin without
other signs.
scrofula (a type of
tuberculosis)
venereal
lymphogranuloma
chancroid
mask of
pregnancy
pellagra (a type
of malnutrition)
Kaposi’s Sarcoma
(KS, cancer
related to the
HIV virus).
malnutrition
tinea versicolor
(fungus infection)
pinta
(infection)
vitiligo
(loss of color,
nothing more)
eczema
erysipelas
(cellulitis or very
serious bacterial
infections)
diaper rash from
urine or heat
moniliasis
(yeast infection)
psoriasis
(or sometimes
tuberculosis)
212
238
403
207
208
209
399-
401
208
209
206
207
207
216
212
215
242
216
212
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
198
A Guide to Identification
IF THE SKIN
HAS:
AND LOOKS
LIKE:
YOU MAY
HAVE:
SEE
PAGE:
warts
Simple warts, not very large.
Wart-like growths on the penis,
vagina, or around the anus.
Bumpy, wart-like growths on 
other parts of the body.
Large warts (more than 1 cm.),
often on arms or feet.
Small rings that continue
to grow or spread and
may itch.
large circles with a thick border
that do not itch.
Small rings, sometimes
with a small pit in the
middle, found on the
temple, nose, or neck.
rings
(spots with
raised or
red edges,
often clear
in the center)
Very itchy rash, bumps, or
patches. (They may appear
and disappear rapidly.)
welts or 
hives
Blisters with bumps and much
itching and weeping (oozing).
blisters
Small blisters over
the whole body,
with some fever.
A patch of painful blisters that
appears only on one part of the
body, often in a stripe or cluster.
A gray or black bad
smelling area with blisters
and air pockets that spread.
A rash that very sick
children get over the
whole body.
small reddish
spots or a
rash over the
whole body;
fever
After a few days of fever a few
small pinkish spots appear on
the body; the person is very
sick.
typhoid fever
measles
gas gangrene (very
serious bacterial
infection)
Herpes zoster
(shingles)
chickenpox
allergic reaction
cancer
of the skin
advanced stage
of syphilis
Ringworm
(fungus infection)
a type of
tuberculosis
of the skin
genital warts
yaws
common warts
(virus infection)
210
402
202
212
205
237
191
211
203
311
204
213
311
188
contact
dermatitis
(like poison
ivy or sumac)
204
Large rings that are white or lighter 
colored and become numb in the center. 
(A needle prick does not hurt them.)
leprosy
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
199
SCABIES (SEVEN YEAR ITCH)
Scabies is especially common in children. It causes very itchy little bumps that 
can appear all over the body, but are most common:
Scabies is caused by little animals—similar to tiny ticks or chiggers—which make 
tunnels under the skin. It is spread by touching the affected skin or by clothes and 
bedding. Scratching can cause infection, producing sores with pus, and sometimes 
swollen lymph nodes or fever. The first time a person gets scabies, it can take 2 to  
6 weeks for signs to appear. If the person has had scabies before, signs will appear 
in 1 to 4 days.
Treatment:
♦	 If one person has scabies, everyone in his family should be treated. So should 
all sexual contacts.
♦	 Personal cleanliness is of first importance. Bathe and change clothes daily.
♦	 Cut fingernails very short to reduce spreading and infection.
♦	 Wash all clothes and bedding or, better still, boil them. Hang them in the sun 
to dry.
♦	 Remove all animals from the house.
♦	 Use a cream containing permethrin (Elimite, see page 372), which is made 
from chrysanthemum flowers. First wash the whole body vigorously with soap 
and hot water. Then rub the cream into the whole body except the face, unless 
it is affected. Leave it on for 10 to 14 hours, and then bathe again. Be sure to 
put on clean clothes and use clean bedding after treatment. Repeat treatment 
1 week later.
♦	 Do not use creams or ointments that include lindane. Lindane is a poison! 
♦	 If you cannot get permethrin, try crotamiton (Eurax, Crotan) but avoid using it 
on children under 3 years old.
♦	 Or you can try using sulfur powder mixed with lard, Vaseline or body oil – use
1 part sulfur to 10 parts lard or oil. Do not use on children under 1 year old. Apply 
to whole body (except face) 3 times a day for 3 days. Stop using immediately if 
rash worsens or other signs of allergic reaction develop (see p. 166).
♦	 If none of these treatments work, you can try giving a dose of ivermectin (see 
p. 377), and then repeat the dose after 10 to 14 days. This is the best method 
for a person with HIV. 
The itching and rash may last for up to two weeks after treatment. If they last 
longer, it is possible that the person has been re-infected or that the treatment did not 
work. If after 2 weeks the signs have not gone away, repeat the treatment again or try 
a different treatment. Remember to repeat the prevention actions as well.
between the fingers
on the wrists
around the waist
on the genitals
between the toes
usually does not appear on head 
and face—except in babies
Small itchy sores on the penis
and scrotum of young boys
are almost always scabies.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
200
LICE
There are 3 kinds: head lice, body lice, and pubic lice (or 
‘crabs’) that live in the hairy parts of the body. Lice cause 
itching, and sometimes skin infections and swollen lymph 
nodes. To avoid lice, take great care with personal cleanliness. 
Wash clothing and bedding often and hang them in the sun. Bathe and wash hair often. 
Check children’s hair. If they have lice, treat them all at once, otherwise they will pass 
them back and forth to each other. Do not let a child with lice sleep with others.
Treatment:
For head and pubic lice: You can usually get rid of lice without medicines by scrubbing 
the hair well with regular soap or shampoo for 10 minutes. Rinse well, and comb 
thoroughly with a fine-tooth comb, being sure to remove all the lice and their eggs. 
Repeat every day for 2 weeks.
Do not use shampoos that include lindane. 
Lindane is poison! If regular shampoos do 
not work, medicated shampoos that include 
pyrethrins (RID) or permethrin (Nix) may work, 
but follow the directions carefully. Keep them out 
of your eyes, watch for allergic reactions, and 
avoid them if you are pregnant or the person with 
lice is younger than 2 years old.
After treating for lice, you must also get rid 
of nits (lice eggs). If the eggs hatch, the lice will 
be back. People have tried different treatments, 
but they all include careful combing. Repeat 
combing every day for 2 weeks to make sure you 
remove all the lice and nits.
♦  Rub olive oil into the hair. This will loosen the nits so they are easier to remove 
with a fine-tooth comb. Some people find that oils such as tea tree, rosemary, or 
eucalyptus (this can feel hot!)  work well, but other people have allergic reactions 
to them.
♦  Soak hair with warm vinegar water (1 part vinegar to 1 part water) for half an hour, 
then comb it thoroughly with a fine-tooth comb.
For body lice: Soak your whole body in a bath of hot water every day for 10 days. After 
each bath, wash thoroughly with soap and rinse well. Use a fine‑tooth comb on any hairy 
places. If necessary, treat as for scabies. Keep clothing and bedding clean.
BEDBUGS
These are very small, flat, crawling insects that hide inside 
mattresses, bedding, furniture, and walls. They usually bite at night. 
The bites often appear in groups or lines.
To get rid of bedbugs, wash bedding and pour boiling water on cots and bed frames. 
Sprinkle sulfur on mattresses, cloth furniture, and rugs and do not use them for 3 weeks. 
Be sure to clean off the powder well before using again.
To prevent bedbugs, spread bedding, mats, and cots in the sun often.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
201
TICKS AND CHIGGERS
Some dangerous infections or paralysis are spread by tick bites. But careful 
removal within a few hours usually prevents these problems. So check the whole 
body well after walking in areas where ticks are common.
When removing a tick that is firmly attached, take care that its head does not 
remain in the skin, since this can cause an infection. Never pull on the body of a tick. 
To remove a tick with tweezers, grasp the tick as close as possible to its mouth—
the part sticking into the skin. (Try not to squeeze its swollen belly.) Pull the tick out 
gently but firmly. Do not touch the removed tick. To kill the removed tick, burn it, or 
hold a lit match near it, or put some alcohol on it.
To remove very small ticks or chiggers, use 
one of the remedies recommended for scabies 
(see p. 199). To relieve itching or pain caused by 
tick or chigger bites, take aspirin and follow the 
instructions for treatment of itching on p. 203.
To help prevent chiggers and ticks from biting you, dust sulfur powder on your 
body before going into the fields or forests. Especially dust ankles, wrists, waist, and 
underarms.
SMALL SORES WITH PUS
Skin infections in the form of small sores with pus often result from scratching 
insect bites, scabies, or other irritations with dirty fingernails.
Treatment and Prevention:
♦	 Wash the sores well with soap and cooled, boiled 
water, gently soaking off the scabs. Do this daily as 
long as there is pus.
♦	 Leave small sores open to the air. Bandage large 
sores and change the bandage frequently.
♦	 If the skin around a sore is red and hot, or if the 
person has a fever, red lines coming from the sore, 
or swollen lymph nodes, use an antibiotic—such as 
penicillin tablets (p. 351) or sulfa tablets (p. 356).
♦	 Do not scratch. This makes the sores worse and can 
spread infection to other parts of the body. Cut the 
fingernails of small children very short. Or put gloves 
or socks over their hands so they cannot scratch.
♦	 Never let a child with sores or any skin infection play or sleep with other 
children. These infections are easily spread.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
202
IMPETIGO
This is a bacterial infection that causes rapidly spreading sores 
with shiny, yellow crusts. It often occurs on children’s faces especially 
around the mouth. Impetigo can spread easily to other people from 
the sores or contaminated fingers.
Treatment:
♦	 Wash the affected part with soap and cooled, boiled water 3 to 4 times each day, 
gently soaking off the crusts.
♦	 After each washing, paint the sores with gentian violet (p. 370) or spread on an 
antibiotic cream containing bacitracin such as Polysporin (p. 370).
♦	 If the infection is spread over a large area or causes fever, give cloxacillin or 
dicloxacillin (p. 350). If the person is allergic to medicines of the penicillin family 
or if these medicines do not seem to be helping, try doxycycline (p. 355) or 
cotrimoxazole (p. 357).
Prevention:
♦	 Follow the Guidelines of Personal Cleanliness (p. 133). Bathe children daily and 
protect them from bedbugs and biting flies. If a child gets scabies, treat him as 
soon as possible.
♦	 Do not let a child with impetigo sleep with other children or play with them. Begin 
treatment at the first sign.
Yaws
Yaws is a bacterial infection that you first notice when a painless, bumpy growth 
emerges and gets larger and may spread a little. After about 6 months, the growth 
disappears. Months or years later, it reappears, spreads more, and may ooze. This 
is when it can spread to other people. These signs will also disappear. But if it is not 
treated, after 5 or 10 years the yaws infection can spread throughout the body, harming 
bones, joints, and causing other problems.
Treatment:
♦	 Though the yaws bacteria is related to syphilis, it is spread by physical, not 
sexual, contact. Yaws can be tested for using the same test and treated using the 
same medicines and doses for syphilis (see pages 237 to 238).
BOILS AND ABSCESSES
A boil, or abscess, is an infection that forms a sac of 
pus under the skin, This can happen when the root of a 
hair gets infected. Or it can result from a puncture wound 
or an injection given with a dirty needle. A boil is painful 
and the skin around it becomes red and hot. It can cause 
swollen lymph nodes and fever.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
203
ITCHING RASH, WELTS, OR HIVES
(ALLERGIC REACTIONS IN THE SKIN)
Touching, eating, injecting, or breathing certain things can cause an 
itching rash or hives in allergic persons. For more details, see Allergic 
Reactions, p. 166.
Hives are thick, raised spots or patches that look like bee stings and itch like 
mad. They may come and go rapidly or move from one spot to another.
Be on the watch for any reaction caused by certain medicines, especially 
injections of penicillin and antivenoms or antitoxins made from horse serum. A rash 
or hives may appear from a few minutes up to 10 days after the medicine has been 
injected.
If you get an itching rash, hives, or any other allergic reaction after taking 
or being injected with any medicine, stop using it and never use that 
medicine again in your life!
This is very important to prevent the danger of ALLERGIC SHOCK (see p. 70).
Medicines used by people with HIV may cause a rash, especially cotrimoxazole 
(p. 357) and nevirapine (p. 397). Sometimes the rash can be avoided by starting 
with a small amount of medicine and slowly increasing the amount to the full dose.
Treatment of itching:
♦	 Bathe in cool water or use cool compresses—cloths soaked in cold water or 
ice water.
♦	 Compresses of cool oatmeal water also calm itching. Boil the oatmeal in water, 
strain it, and use the water when cool. (Starch can be used instead of oats.)
♦	 If itching is severe, take an antihistamine like chlorpheniramine (p. 386).
♦	 To protect a baby from scratching himself, cut his 
fingernails very short, or put gloves or socks over 
his hands.
Treatment:
♦	 Put hot compresses over the boil several times a day (see p. 195).
♦	 Let the boil break open by itself. After it opens, keep using hot compresses. 
Allow the pus to drain, but never press or squeeze the boil, since this can 
cause the infection to spread to other parts of the body.
♦	 If the abscess is very painful and does not open after 2 or 3 days of hot soaks, 
it may help to have it cut open so the pus can drain out. This will quickly 
reduce the pain. If possible, get medical help.
♦	 If the boil causes swollen nodes or fever, take penicillin tablets (p. 351) or 
erythromycin (p. 354) or dicloxicillin (p. 350), take 500 mg by mouth, 4 times a 
day for 7 days. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
204
PLANTS AND OTHER THINGS THAT CAUSE ITCHING
OR BURNING OF THE SKIN
Nettles, ‘stinging trees’, sumac, ‘poison ivy’, and 
many other plants may cause blisters, burns, or 
hives with itching when they touch the skin. Juices 
or hairs of certain caterpillars and other insects 
produce similar reactions.
In allergic persons rashes or ‘weeping’ sore 
patches may be caused by certain things that 
touch or are put on the skin, Rubber shoes, 
watchbands, ear drops and other medicines, face 
creams, perfumes, or soaps may cause such 
problems.
Treatment:
All these irritations go away by themselves when the things that cause them no 
longer touch the skin. A paste of oatmeal and cool water helps calm the itching. Aspirin 
or antihistamines (p. 385) may also help. In severe cases, you can use a cream that 
contains cortisone or a cortico-steroid (see p. 370) To prevent infection, keep the 
irritated areas clean.
SHINGLES (HERPES ZOSTER)
Signs:
A line or patch of painful blisters that suddenly 
appears on one side of the body is probably 
shingles.  It is most common on the back,  
chest, neck, or face. The blisters usually last 
2 or 3 weeks, then go away by themselves. 
Sometimes the pain continues or returns long 
after the blisters are gone.
Shingles is caused by the virus that causes 
chickenpox and usually affects persons who 
have had chickenpox before. It is not dangerous, 
but it can be painful. It is sometimes the first sign 
of some other more serious problem—perhaps 
cancer or HIV infection (see p. 399).
Treatment:
♦  Put light bandages over the rash so that clothes do not rub against it.
♦  Take aspirin for the pain. Acyclovir can help keep herpes blisters from spreading 
(see p. 373). Antibiotics do not help.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
205
FUNGUS INFECTIONS (RINGWORM, TINEA)
Fungus infections may appear on any part of the body, but occur most 
frequently on:
Most fungus infections grow in the form of a ring. They often itch. Ringworm of 
the head can produce round patches with scales and loss of hair. Finger and toe 
nails infected with the fungus become rough and thick.
Treatment:
♦	 Soap and water. Washing the infected part every day with soap and water 
may be all that is needed.
♦	 Do your best to keep the affected areas dry and exposed to the air or 
sunlight. Change underwear or socks often, especially when sweaty.
♦	 Use a cream of sulfur and lard (1 part sulfur to 10 parts lard).
♦	 Creams and powders with salicylic or undecylenic acid, or tolnaftate 
(Tinactin, p. 371) help cure the fungus between the fingers, toes and groin.
♦	 For severe tinea of the scalp, or any fungus infection that is widespread 
or does not get better with the above treatments, take griseofulvin, 1 gram 
a day for adults and half a gram a day for children (p. 371). It may be 
necessary to keep taking it for weeks or even 
months to completely control the infection. 
But pregnant women should not  
take griseofulvin.
♦	 Many tineas of the scalp clear up 
when a child reaches puberty  
(11 to 14 years old). Severe 
infections forming large swollen 
patches with pus should be 
treated with compresses of warm 
water (p. 195). It is important to pull 
out all of the hair from the infected 
part. Use griseofulvin, if possible.
the scalp
(tinea)
the parts without
hair (ringworm)
between the
toes or fingers
(athlete’s foot)
between the legs
(jock itch)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
206
How to prevent fungal infections:
Ringworm and all other fungus infections are contagious (easily spread). To 
prevent spreading them from one child to others:
♦	 Do not let a child with a fungal infection sleep with the others.
♦	 Do not let different children use the same comb, or use each other’s clothing 
or towel, unless these are washed or well cleaned first.
♦	 Treat an infected child at once.
WHITE SPOTS ON THE FACE AND BODY
Tinea versicolor is a mild fungus infection that causes small dark 
or light spots with a distinct and irregular border that are often seen 
on the neck, chest, and back. The spots may be slightly scaly but 
usually do not itch. They are of little medical importance.
Treatment:
♦	 Make a cream with sulfur and lard (1 part sulfur to 10 parts 
lard) and apply it to the whole body every day until they 
disappear. Or use an anti-fungal cream (p. 371).
♦	 Sodium thiosulfate works better. This is the ‘hypo’ 
photographers use when developing film. Dissolve a 
tablespoon of sodium thiosulfate in a glass of water and apply 
it to the whole upper body. Then rub the skin with a piece of 
cotton dipped in vinegar.
♦	 To prevent the spots from returning, it is often necessary to repeat this 
treatment every 2 weeks.
♦	 Selenium sulfide (p. 371) or Whitfield’s ointment may also help.
There is another kind of small whitish spot 
that is common on the cheeks of dark-skinned 
children who spend a lot of time in the sun. 
The border is less clear than in tinea versicolor. 
These spots are not an infection and are of no 
importance. Usually they go away as the child 
grows up. Avoid harsh soaps and apply oil. No 
other treatment is needed.
Contrary to popular opinion, none of these types of white spots is a sign of anemia. 
They will not go away with tonics or vitamins. The spots that are only on the cheeks do 
not need any treatment.
CAUTION: Sometimes pale spots are early signs of leprosy (see p. 191). Leprosy 
spots are never completely white and may have reduced feeling when pricked by a 
pin. If leprosy is common in your area, have the child checked.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
207
Vitiligo (White Areas of the Skin)
In some persons, certain areas of the skin lose 
their natural color (pigment). Then white patches 
appear. These are most common on the hands, 
feet, face, and upper body. This loss of normal 
skin color—called vitiligo—is not an illness. It can 
be compared to white hair in older people. No 
treatment helps or is needed, but the white skin 
should be protected from sunburn—with clothing 
or an ointment of zinc oxide. Also, special coloring 
creams can help make the spots less noticeable.
Other Causes of White Skin Patches
Certain diseases may cause white spots that 
look like vitiligo. In Latin America an infectious 
disease called pinta starts with bluish or red 
pimples and later leaves pale or white patches.
Treatment of pinta is 2.4 million units of 
benzathine penicillin injected into the buttocks  
(1.2 million units in each buttock). For a 
person allergic to penicillin give tetracycline or 
erythromycin, 500 mg. 4 times each day for  
15 days.
Some fungus infections also cause whitish 
spots (see tinea versicolor, on the opposite page).
General or patchy, partial loss of skin and 
hair color in children may be caused by severe 
malnutrition (kwashiorkor, p. 113; or pellagra,  
p. 208).
MASK OF PREGNANCY
During pregnancy many women develop 
dark, olive-colored areas on the skin of the 
face, breasts, and down the middle of the belly. 
Sometimes these disappear after the birth 
and sometimes not. These marks also appear 
sometimes on women who are taking birth 
control pills.
They are completely normal and do not indicate 
weakness or sickness. No treatment is needed.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
208
PELLAGRA
AND OTHER SKIN PROBLEMS DUE TO MALNUTRITION
Pellagra is a form of malnutrition that affects the skin and sometimes the digestive 
and nervous systems. It is very common in places where people eat a lot of maize 
(corn) or other starchy foods and not enough beans, meat, fish, eggs, vegetables, and 
other body-building and protective foods (see p. 110).
Skin signs in malnutrition (see the pictures on the following page):
In adults with pellagra the skin 
is dry and cracked; it peels like 
sunburn on the parts where the 
sun hits it, especially:
In malnourished children, the 
skin of the legs (and sometimes 
arms) may have dark marks, like 
bruises, or even peeling sores; 
the ankles and feet may be 
swollen (see p. 113).
on the 
nape of 
the neck
on the
backs of 
the legs
peeling sores 
and dark 
marks
swollen 
ankles 
and feet
on the 
arms
When these conditions exist, often there are also other signs of malnutrition: swollen 
belly; sores in the corners of the mouth; red, sore tongue; weakness; loss of appetite; 
failure to gain weight; etc. (see Chapter 11, p. 112 and 113).
Treatment:
♦	 Eating nutritious foods cures pellagra. Every day a person should try to eat 
beans, lentils, groundnuts, or some chicken, fish, eggs, meat, or cheese. When 
you have a choice, it is also better to use wheat (preferably whole wheat) instead 
of maize (corn).
♦	 For severe pellagra and some other forms of malnutrition, it may help to take 
vitamins, but good food is more important. Be sure the vitamin formula you use 
is high in the B vitamins, especially niacin. Brewer’s yeast is a good source of  
B vitamins.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
209
The swelling and dark spots 
on this boy’s legs and feet are 
the result of poor nutrition. He 
was eating mostly maize (corn) 
without any foods rich in proteins 
and vitamins.
One week after he began to 
eat beans and eggs along with 
the maize, the swelling was 
gone and the spots had almost 
disappeared.
The ‘burnt’ skin on the legs 
of this woman is a sign of 
pellagra—which results from 
not eating well (see p. 208).
The white spots on the legs 
of this woman are due to an 
infectious disease called pinta 
(see p. 207).
Before 
eating well
After 
eating well
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
210
WARTS (VERRUCAE)
Most warts, especially those in children, last 3 to 
5 years and go away by themselves. Flat, painful wart-like 
spots on the sole of the foot are often ‘plantar warts’.  
(Or they may be corns. See below.)
Treatment:
♦	 Magical or household cures often get rid of warts. 
But it is safer not to use strong acids or poisonous 
plants, as these may cause burns or sores much 
worse than the warts.
♦	 Painful plantar warts sometimes can be removed 
by a health worker.
♦	 For warts on the penis or vagina, see p. 402.
CORNS
A corn is a hard, thick part of the skin. It forms where sandals or shoes push against 
the skin, or one toe presses against another. Corns can be very painful.
Treatment:
♦	 Get sandals or shoes that do not press on the corns.
♦	 To make corns hurt less, do this:
1.	 Soak the foot in warm 
water for 15 minutes.
2.	 With a file or rasp, trim down the 
corn until it is thin.
3.	 Pad the foot around the corn so that 
it will not press against the shoe or 
another toe. Wrap the foot or toe in 
a soft cloth to make a thick pad and 
cut a hole around the corn.
rolls of
cotton
cotton or 
cardboard
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
211
PIMPLES AND BLACKHEADS (ACNE)
Young people sometimes get pimples on their face, 
chest, or back—especially if their skin has too much oil in 
it. Pimples are little lumps that form tiny white ‘heads’ of 
pus or blackheads of dirt. Sometimes they can become 
quite sore and large.
Treatment:
♦	 Wash the face twice a day with soap and hot water.
♦	 Wash the hair every 2 days, if possible.
♦	 Sunshine helps clear pimples. Let the sunlight fall on 
the affected parts of the body.
♦	 Eat as well as possible, drink a lot of water, and get enough sleep.
♦	 Do not use skin or hair lotions that are waxy, oily, or greasy.
♦	 Before you go to bed, put a mixture of alcohol with a little sulfur on the face 
(10 parts alcohol to 1 part sulfur).
♦	 For serious cases forming lumps and pockets of pus, if these do not get better 
with the methods already described, tetracycline may help. Take 1 capsule 
4 times a day for 3 days and then 2 capsules daily. It may be necessary to 
take 1 or 2 capsules daily for months.
CANCER OF THE SKIN
Skin cancer is most frequent in light-skinned persons who spend a lot of time in 
the sun. It usually appears in places where the sun hits with most force, especially:
on the ear
Skin cancer may take many forms. It usually begins as a little ring the color of 
pearl with a hole in the center. It grows little by little.
Most cancers of the skin are not dangerous if treated in time. Surgery is 
needed to remove them. If you have a chronic sore that might be skin cancer, see a 
health worker.
To prevent skin cancer, light-skinned persons should protect themselves from 
the sun and always wear a hat. Persons who have suffered from cancer of the skin 
and have to work in the sun can buy special creams that protect them. Zinc oxide 
ointment is cheap and works well.
on the cheekbone 
or temple
on the nose
on the lips
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
212
TUBERCULOSIS OF THE SKIN OR LYMPH NODES
The same microbe that causes tuberculosis of the lungs also sometimes affects 
the skin, causing painless
As a rule, TB of the skin develops slowly, lasts a long time, and keeps coming 
back over a period of months or years.
Also, tuberculosis sometimes infects the lymph 
nodes—most often those of the neck or in the area 
behind the collar bone, between the neck and the 
shoulder. The nodes become large, open, drain pus, 
seal closed for a time, and then open and drain again. 
Usually they are not painful.
Treatment:
In the case of any chronic sore, ulcer, or swollen lymph nodes, it is best to 
seek medical advice. Tests may be needed to learn the cause. Tuberculosis of 
the skin is treated the same as tuberculosis of the lungs (see p. 180). To keep the 
infection from returning, the medicines must be taken for many months after the 
skin looks well.
ERYSIPELAS AND CELLULITIS
Erysipelas (or St. Anthony’s fire) is a very painful 
acute (sudden) infection in the skin. It forms a hot, 
bright red, swollen patch with a sharp border. The 
patch spreads rapidly over the skin. It often begins on 
the face, at the edge of the nose. This usually causes 
swollen lymph nodes, fever, and chills.
Cellulitis is also a very painful, acute infection of the skin that can appear 
anywhere on the body. It usually occurs after a break in the skin. The infection is 
deeper and the borders of the patch are less clear than with erysipelas.
Treatment:
For both erysipelas and cellulitis, begin treatment as soon as possible. Use 
an antibiotic: penicillin tablets, 400,000 units, 4 times a day, in serious cases, 
injectable procaine penicillin, 800,000 units daily (see p. 352). Continue using the 
antibiotic for 2 days after all signs of infection are gone. Also use hot compresses—
and aspirin for pain.
tumors
that disfigure,
chronic patches of 
sores,
skin
 ulcers,
big
warts.
or
TUBERCULOSIS 
OF THE LYMPH 
NODES, OR 
SCROFULA
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
213
GANGRENE (GAS GANGRENE)
This is a very dangerous infection of a wound, in 
which a foul-smelling gray or brown liquid forms. The 
skin near the wound may have dark blisters and the 
flesh may have air bubbles in it. The infection begins 
between 6 hours and 3 days after the injury. It quickly 
gets worse and spreads fast. Without treatment it causes 
death in a few days.
Treatment:
♦	 Open up the wound as wide as possible. Wash it out with cool, boiled water 
and soap. Clean out the dead and damaged flesh. If possible, flood the 
wound with hydrogen peroxide every 2 hours.
♦	 Inject penicillin (crystalline if possible), 1,000,000 (a million) units every 
3 hours.
♦	 Leave the wound uncovered so that air gets to it. Get medical help.
ULCERS OF THE SKIN CAUSED BY POOR CIRCULATION
Skin ulcers, or large, open sores, have many causes (see p. 20). However, 
chronic ulcers on the ankles of older persons, especially in 
women with varicose veins, usually come from poor circulation. 
The blood is not moved fast enough through the legs. Such 
ulcers may become very large. The skin around the ulcer is 
dark blue, shiny, and very thin. Often the foot is swollen.
Treatment:
♦	 These ulcers heal very slowly—and only if great 
care is taken. Most important: Keep the foot up 
high as often as possible. Sleep with it on pillows. 
During the day, rest with the foot up high every  
15 or 20 minutes. Walking helps the circulation, 
but standing in one place and sitting with the 
feet down are harmful.
♦	 Put warm compresses of weak salt water on the 
ulcer—1 teaspoon salt to a liter of boiled water. Cover 
the ulcer loosely with sterile gauze or a clean cloth. 
Keep it clean.
♦	 Support the varicose veins with elastic stockings 
or bandages. Continue to use these and to keep the 
feet up after the ulcer heals. Take great care not to 
scratch or injure the delicate scar.
♦	 Treating the ulcers with honey or sugar may help 
(see p. 214).
Prevent skin ulcers—care for varicose veins early (see p. 175).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
214
BED SORES (PRESSURE SORES)
These chronic open sores appear in persons so ill they cannot roll over in bed, 
especially in sick old persons who are very thin and weak. The sores form over bony 
parts of the body where the skin is pressed against the bedding. They are most often 
seen on the buttocks, back, shoulders, elbows, or feet.
For a more complete discussion of pressure sores, see Disabled Village Children, 
Chapter 24, or A Health Handbook for Women with Disabilities, pages 114 to 117.
How to prevent bed sores:
♦	 Turn the sick person over every hour: face up, face down, side to side.
♦	 Bathe him every day and rub his skin with baby oil.
♦	 Use soft bed sheets and padding. Change them daily and each time the bedding 
gets dirty with urine, stools, vomit, etc.
♦	 Put cushions under the person in such a way that the bony parts rub less.
♦	 Feed the sick person as well as possible. If he does not eat well, extra vitamins 
and iron may help (see p. 118).
♦	 A child who has a severe chronic illness should be held often on his mother’s lap.
Treatment:
♦	 Do all the things mentioned above.
♦	 3 times a day, wash the sores with cool, boiled water mixed with mild soap. 
Gently remove any dead flesh. Rinse well with cool, boiled water.
♦	 To fight infection and speed healing, fill the sore with honey, sugar, or molasses. 
(A paste made of honey and sugar is easiest to use.) It is important to clean and 
refill the sore at least 2 times a day. If the honey or sugar becomes too thin with 
liquid from the sore, it will feed germs rather than kill them.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
215
SKIN PROBLEMS OF BABIES
Diaper Rash
Reddish patches of irritation between a 
baby’s legs or buttocks may be caused by 
urine in his diapers (nappy) or bedding.
Treatment:
♦	 Bathe the child daily with lukewarm water and mild soap. Dry her carefully.
♦	 To prevent or cure the rash, the child should be kept naked, without 
diapers, and he should be taken out into the sun.
♦	 If diapers are used, change them often. After washing the diapers, rinse them in 
water with a little vinegar.
♦	 It is best not to use talc (talcum powder), but if you do, wait until the rash is gone.
Dandruff (Cradle Cap, Seborrhea)
Dandruff is an oily, yellow to white crust that usually forms 
in patches on the scalp, but also on the cheeks, forehead, 
eyebrows, nose and ears. The skin is often red and irritated. 
In babies, dandruff usually results from not washing the 
baby’s head often enough, or from keeping the head 
covered. It is also a common problem for people with HIV.
Treatment:
♦ 	 Wash the head daily. A medicated soap can help, but usually regular soap and 
water are enough (see p. 370).
♦	 Gently clean off all the dandruff and crust. To loosen the scales and crust, first 
wrap the head with towels soaked in lukewarm water.
♦	 Keep the head uncovered, open to the air and sunlight.
♦	 If there are signs of infection, treat as for impetigo (see p. 202).
NO
YES
BARE IS BEST
BARE IS BEST
NO
YES
DO NOT COVER A 
BABY’S HEAD WITH 
A CAP OR CLOTH. 
KEEP THE HEAD 
UNCOVERED.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
216
ECZEMA (RED PATCHES WITH LITTLE BLISTERS)
Signs:
•	 In small children: a red patch or rash forms 
on the cheeks or sometimes on the arms and 
hands. The rash consists of small sores or 
blisters that ooze or weep (burst and leak fluid).
•	 In older children and grown ups: eczema is 
usually drier and is most common behind the 
knees and on the inside of the elbows.
•	 It does not start as an infection but is more like 
an allergic reaction.
Treatment:
♦	 Put cold compresses on the rash.
♦	 If signs of infection develop (p. 88), treat as for 
impetigo (p. 202).
♦	 Let the sunlight fall on the patches.
♦	 In difficult cases, use a cortisone or 
cortico-steroid cream (see p. 370). Or coal tar 
may help. Seek medical advice.
PSORIASIS
Signs:
•	 Thick, rough patches 
of reddish or blue‑gray 
skin covered with whitish 
or silver‑colored scales. 
The patches appear most 
commonly in the parts shown  
in the drawings.
•	 The condition usually lasts a 
long time or keeps coming 
back. It is not an infection and  
is not dangerous.
Treatment:
♦	 Leaving the affected skin open 
to the sunlight often helps.
♦	 Bathing in the ocean 
sometimes helps.
♦	 Seek medical advice. Treatment 
must be continued for a long time.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
217
DANGER SIGNS
The eyes are delicate and need good care. Get medical help fast when any of 
the following danger signs occurs:
1.	 Any injury that cuts or ruptures (goes through) the eyeball.
2.	 Painful, grayish spot on the cornea, with redness around the cornea 
(corneal ulcer).
3.	 Great pain inside the eye (possibly iritis or glaucoma).
4.	 A big difference in the size of the pupils when there is pain in the eye or the head.
5.	 Blood behind the cornea inside the eyeball  
(see p. 225)
6.	 If vision begins to fail in one or both eyes.
7.	 A white glow or reflection in the pupil. This could be a sign of cancer 
(retinoblastoma) or a cataract (see p. 225).
8.	 Any eye infection or inflammation that does not get better after 5 or 6 days 
of treatment with an antibiotic eye ointment.
tear gland
pupil
iris
tear tube 
from eye 
to nose
The conjunctiva is 
the thin layer that 
covers the white of 
the eye.
A big difference in the size of the 
pupils may come from brain damage, 
stroke, injury to the eye, glaucoma, or 
iritis. (A small difference is normal in 
some people.)
The cornea is the 
clear or transparent 
layer that covers the 
iris and the pupil.
CHAPTER
16
The Eyes
218
INJURIES TO THE EYE
All injuries to the eyeball must be considered dangerous, for they may cause 
blindness.
Even small cuts on the cornea (the transparent layer covering the pupil and iris) may 
get infected and harm the vision if not cared for correctly.
If a wound to the eyeball is so deep that it reaches the black layer beneath the outer 
white layer, this is especially dangerous.
If a blunt injury (as with a fist) causes the eyeball to fill with blood, the eye is in 
danger (see p. 225). Danger is especially great if pain suddenly gets much worse after 
a few days, for this is probably acute glaucoma (p. 222).
Treatment:
♦ If the person still sees well with the injured eye, 
put an antibiotic eye ointment (p. 378) in the eye 
and cover it with a soft, thick bandage. If the eye 
is not better in a day or two, get medical help.
♦ If the person cannot see well with the injured eye, 
if the wound is deep, or if there is blood inside 
the eye behind the cornea (p. 225), cover the eye 
with a clean bandage and go for medical help at 
once. Do not press on the eye.
♦ Do not try to remove thorns or splinters that are 
tightly stuck in the eyeball. Get medical help.
HOW TO REMOVE A SPECK OF DIRT FROM THE EYE
Have the person close her eyes and look to the left, the right, up and down. Then, 
while you hold her eye open, have her look up and then down. This will make the eye 
produce more tears and the dirt often comes out by itself.
Or you can try to remove the bit of dirt or sand by flooding the eye with clean water 
(p. 219) or by using the corner of a clean cloth or some moist cotton. If the particle of 
dirt is under the upper lid, look for it by turning the lid up over a thin stick. The person 
should look down while you do this:
If you cannot get the particle out easily, use an antibiotic eye ointment, cover the eye 
with a bandage, and go for medical help.
The particle is often found in 
the small groove near the edge 
of the lid. Remove it with the 
corner of a clean cloth.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
219
‘PINK EYE’ (CONJUNCTIVITIS)
This infection causes redness, pus, and mild ‘burning’ in one or both eyes. Lids 
often stick together after sleep. It is especially common in children.
Treatment:
First clean pus from the eyes with a 
clean cloth moistened with boiled water. 
Then put in antibiotic eye ointment 
(p. 378). Pull down the lower lid and put 
a little bit of ointment inside, like this: 
Putting ointment outside the eye does 
no good.
Prevention:
Most conjunctivitis is very contagious. The infection is easily spread from one 
person to another. Do not let a child with pink eye play or sleep with others, or use 
the same towel. Wash hands after touching eyes.
CHEMICAL BURNS OF THE EYE
Battery acid, lye, gasoline, or a pesticide that gets into the eye 
can be dangerous. Hold open the eye. Immediately flood the 
eye with clean, cool water. Keep flooding for 30 minutes, or 
until it stops hurting. Do not let the water get into the other eye.
RED, PAINFUL EYES—DIFFERENT CAUSES
Many different problems cause red, painful eyes. Correct treatment often 
depends on finding the cause, so be sure to check carefully for signs of each 
possibility. This chart may help you find the cause:
foreign matter (bit of dirt, etc.) 
in the eye (p. 218)
burns or harmful liquids 
(p. 219)
‘pink eye’ (conjunctivitis, p. 219)
hay fever (allergic conjunctivitis, 
p. 165)
trachoma (p. 220)
measles (p. 311)
acute glaucoma (p. 222)
iritis (p. 221)
scratch or ulcer on the cornea 
(p. 224)
usually one eye only;
reddest next to 
the cornea
pain often great
usually both eyes (may start 
or be worse in one)
usually reddest 
at outer edge
‘burning’ pain, usually mild
one or both eyes;
redness and pain variable
usually affects one eye only;
redness and pain variable
CAUTION: Do 
not touch the tube 
against the eye.
EYE 
OINTMENT
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
220
TRACHOMA
Trachoma is a chronic infection that slowly gets worse. It may last for months or 
many years. If not treated early, it sometimes causes blindness. It is spread by touch or 
by flies, and is most common where people live in poor, crowded conditions.
Signs:
Treatment of trachoma:
Put 1% tetracycline or erythromycin eye ointment (p. 378) inside the eye 3 times 
each day, or 3% tetracycline or erythromycin eye ointment 1 time each day. Do this for 
30 days. For a complete cure, also take tetracycline (p. 355), erythromycin (p. 354) or a 
sulfonamide (p. 356) by mouth for 2 to 3 weeks.
Prevention:
Early and complete treatment of trachoma helps prevent its spread to others. All 
persons living with someone who has trachoma, especially children, should have 
their eyes examined often and if signs appear, they should be treated early. Washing 
the face every day can help prevent trachoma. Also, it is very important to follow the 
Guidelines of Cleanliness, explained in Chapter 12.
These scars make the eyelids thick 
and may keep them from opening 
or closing all the way.
Or the scarring may pull the eyelashes 
down into the eye, scratching the 
cornea and causing blindness.
Cleanliness helps prevent trachoma.
•	 Trachoma begins with red, watery eyes, like 
ordinary conjunctivitis.
•	 After a month or more, small, pinkish gray 
lumps, called follicles, form inside the upper 
eyelids. To see these, turn back the lid as 
shown on p. 218.
•	 The white of the eye is a little red.
•	 After a few months, if you look very carefully, 
or with a magnifying glass, you may see that 
the top edge of the cornea looks grayish, 
because it has many tiny new blood vessels 
in it (pannus).
•	 The combination of both follicles and pannus 
is almost certainly trachoma.
•	 After several years, the follicles begin to 
disappear, leaving whitish scars.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
221
INFECTED EYES IN NEWBORN BABIES
(NEONATAL CONJUNCTIVITIS)
If a mother has chlamydia or gonorrhea (see p. 236), she 
may pass these infections to her baby at birth. The infection gets 
into the baby’s eyes and can cause blindness and other health 
problems. If the baby’s eyes get red, swell, and have a lot of pus 
in them within the first month, she may have one or both of these 
infections. It is important to provide treatment immediately. 
Treatment for gonorrhea:
♦   Inject 125 mg. ceftriaxone in the thigh muscle, 1 time only (see p. 359).
Treatment for chlamydia: 
♦   Give 30 mg. erythromycin syrup by mouth, 4 times a day for 14 days 
(see p. 359).
If you cannot test to find out which disease is causing the infection, give 
medicines for both. The baby’s eyes should also be cleaned and treated with the 
medicines listed below.
Prevention:
Many women have chlamydia or gonorrhea and do not know they are infected. 
Unless the mother has a test to show that she does not have these infections, give 
every baby medicine (see p. 378) in the eyes to prevent blindness: 
•	 put a line of erythromycin 0.5% to 1% ointment in each of the baby’s eyes 
within the first 2 hours after birth. or
•	 put a line of tetracycline 1% eye ointment in each of the baby’s eyes within the 
first 2 hours after birth. or
•	 if you do not have erythromycin or tetracycline, put 1 drop of 2.5% solution of 
povidone-iodine in each of the baby’s eyes within the first 2 hours after birth.
Some people use a 1% solution of silver nitrate (or other silver eye medicines) in 
the baby’s eyes. These medicines stop blindness from gonorrhea, but they do not 
stop blindness from chlamydia. Silver nitrate also irritates the baby’s eyes for several 
days. If you can get erythromycin or tetracycline eye medicine, or povidone-iodine, 
use one of them. But use silver nitrate if that is all you have.
If a baby develops gonorrhea or chlamydia of the eyes, both parents should be 
treated for these infections (p. 237 and 359).
IRITIS (INFLAMMATION OF THE IRIS)
NORMAL EYE
EYE WITH IRITIS
Signs :
pupil small  
often irregular
redness around iris
severe pain
Iritis usually happens in one eye only. Pain may begin suddenly or gradually. The 
eye waters a lot. It hurts more in bright light. The eyeball hurts when you touch it. 
There is no pus as with conjunctivitis. Vision is usually blurred.
This is an emergency. Antibiotic ointments do not help. Get medical help.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
222
GLAUCOMA
This dangerous disease is the result of too much pressure in the eye. It usually 
begins after the age of 40 and is a common cause of blindness. To prevent blindness, 
it is important to recognize the signs of glaucoma and get medical help fast.
There are 2 forms of glaucoma.
ACUTE GLAUCOMA
This starts suddenly with a headache or severe pain in the eye. The eye becomes 
red, the vision blurred. The eyeball feels hard to the touch, like a marble. There may be 
vomiting. The pupil of the bad eye is bigger than that of the good eye.
If not treated very soon, acute glaucoma will cause blindness within a few days. 
Surgery is often needed. Get medical help fast.
CHRONIC GLAUCOMA
The pressure in the eye rises slowly. Usually there is no pain. Vision is lost slowly, 
starting from the side, and often the person does not notice the loss. Testing the side 
vision may help detect the disease.
If discovered early, treatment with special eyedrops (pilocarpine) may prevent 
blindness. Dosage should be determined by a doctor or health worker who can 
measure the eye pressure periodically. Drops must be used for the rest of one’s life. 
When possible, eye surgery is usually the surest form of treatment.
Prevention:
Persons who are over 40 years old or have family members who have had glaucoma 
should try to have their eye pressure checked once a year.
normal
glaucoma
TEST FOR GLAUCOMA
Have the person cover one 
eye, and with the other look 
at an object straight ahead of 
him. Note when he can first see 
moving fingers coming from 
behind on each side of the head.
Normally fingers are first seen here.
In glaucoma, finger movement is 
first seen more toward the front.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
223
INFECTION OF THE TEAR SAC (DACRYOCYSTITIS)
Signs:
Redness, pain, and swelling 
beneath the eye, next to the nose. 
The eye waters a lot. A drop of pus 
may appear in the corner of the eye 
when the swelling is gently pressed.
Treatment:
♦  Apply hot compresses.
♦  Put antibiotic eye drops or ointment in the eye.
♦  Take penicillin (p. 350).
TROUBLE SEEING CLEARLY
Children who have trouble seeing clearly or who get headaches or eye pain 
when they read may need glasses. Have their eyes examined.
In older persons, it is normal that, with passing years, 
it becomes more difficult to see close things clearly. 
Reading glasses often help. Pick glasses that let you see 
clearly about 40 cm. (15 inches) away from your eyes.  
If glasses do not help, see an eye doctor.
CROSS EYES AND A WANDERING OR ‘LAZY’ EYE 
(STRABISMUS, ‘SQUINT’)
If the eye sometimes wanders like this, but 
at other times looks ahead normally, usually you 
need not worry. The eye will grow straighter in 
time. But if the eye is always turned the wrong 
way, and if the child is not treated at a very early 
age, she may never see well with that eye. See 
an eye doctor as soon as possible to find out 
if patching of the good eye, surgery, or special 
glasses might help.
Surgery done at a later age can usually straighten the eye and improve the 
child’s appearance, but it will not help the weak eye see better.
IMPORTANT: The eyesight of every child should be 
checked as early as possible (best around 4 years). 
You can use an ‘E’ chart (see Helping Health Workers 
Learn, p. 24‑13). Test each eye separately to discover 
any problem that affects only one eye. If sight is poor in 
one or both eyes, see an eye doctor.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
224
STY (HORDEOLUM)
A red, swollen lump on the eyelid, usually near 
its edge. To treat, apply warm, moist compresses 
with a little salt in the water. Use of an antibiotic 
eye ointment 3 times a day will help prevent more 
sties from occurring (see p. 378).
PTERYGIUM
A fleshy thickening on the eye surface that 
slowly grows out from the edge of the white part 
of the eye near the nose and onto the cornea; 
caused in part by sunlight, wind, and dust. Dark 
glasses may help calm irritation and slow the 
growth of a pterygium. It should be removed by 
surgery before it reaches the pupil. Unfortunately, 
after surgery a pterygium often grows back again.
Folk treatments using powdered shells do more 
harm than good. To help calm itching and burning 
you can try using cold compresses. Or use eye 
drops of camomile (boiled, then strained, cooled, and 
without sugar).
A SCRAPE, ULCER, OR SCAR ON THE CORNEA
When the very thin, delicate surface of the cornea 
has been scraped, or damaged by infection, a painful 
corneal ulcer may result. If you look hard in a good 
light, you may see a grayish or less shiny patch on the 
surface of the cornea.
If not well cared for, a corneal ulcer can cause 
blindness. Apply antibiotic eye ointment, 4 times a day 
for 7 days (p. 378). If the eye is not better in 2 days, get 
medical help.
A corneal scar is a painless, white patch on the 
cornea. It may result from a healed corneal ulcer, burn, 
or other injury to the eye. If both eyes are blind but 
the person still sees light, surgery (corneal transplant) 
to one eye may return its sight. But this is expensive. 
If one eye is scarred, but sight is good in the other, 
avoid surgery. Take care to protect the good eye from 
injury.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
225
BLEEDING IN THE WHITE OF THE EYE
A painless, blood-red patch in the white part of the 
eye occasionally appears after lifting something heavy, 
coughing hard (as with whooping cough), or being hit 
on the eye. The condition results from the bursting of a 
small vessel. It is harmless, like a bruise, and will slowly 
disappear without treatment in about 2 weeks.
Small red patches are common on the eyes of newborn 
babies. No treatment is needed.
BLEEDING BEHIND THE CORNEA (HYPHEMA)
Blood behind the cornea is a danger sign. It 
usually results from an injury to the eye with a blunt 
object, like a fist. If there is pain and loss of sight, 
refer the person to an eye specialist immediately. 
If the pain is mild and there is not loss of sight, put 
a patch on both eyes and keep the person at rest 
in bed for several days. If after a few days the pain 
becomes much worse, there is probably hardening of 
the eye (glaucoma, p. 222). Take the person to an eye 
doctor at once.
PUS BEHIND THE CORNEA (HYPOPYON)
Pus behind the cornea is a sign of severe 
inflammation. It is sometimes seen with corneal 
ulcers and is a sign that the eye is in danger. Apply 
antibiotic eye ointment (p. 378) and get medical 
help at once. If the ulcer is treated correctly, the 
hypopyon will often clear up by itself.
CATARACT
The lens of the eye, behind the pupil, becomes 
cloudy, making the pupil look gray or white when 
you shine a light into it. Cataract is common in older 
persons, but also occurs, rarely, in babies. If a blind 
person with cataracts can still tell light from dark and 
notice movement, surgery may let him see again. 
However, he will need strong glasses afterward, 
which take time to get used to. Medicines do not help 
cataracts. (Now sometimes during surgery an artificial 
lens is put inside the eye so that strong eyeglasses are 
not needed.)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
226
NIGHT BLINDNESS AND XEROPHTHALMIA 
(VITAMIN A DEFICIENCY)
This eye disease is most common in children between 
1 and 5 years of age. It comes from not eating enough 
foods with vitamin A. If not recognized and treated 
early, it can make the child blind.
Signs:
•	At first, the child may have night blindness. 
He cannot see as well in the dark as other 
people can.
•	Later, he develops dry eyes 
(xerophthalmia). The white of the eyes 
loses its shine and begins to wrinkle.
•	Patches of little gray bubbles (Bitot’s spots) 
may form in the eyes.
•	As the disease gets worse, the cornea also 
becomes dry and dull, and may develop little pits.
•	Then the cornea may quickly grow soft, bulge,  
or even burst. Usually there is no pain. 
Blindness may result from infection, scarring, or 
other damage.
•	Xerophthalmia often begins, or gets worse, 
when a child is sick with another illness like 
diarrhea, whooping cough, tuberculosis, or 
measles. Examine the eyes of all sick and 
underweight children. Open the child’s eyes 
and look for signs of vitamin A deficiency.
Prevention and treatment:
Xerophthalmia can easily be prevented by eating foods that have vitamin A.  
Do the following:
♦   Breastfeed the baby—up to 2 years, if possible.
♦   After the first 6 months, begin giving the child 
foods rich in vitamin A, such as dark green leafy 
vegetables, and yellow or orange fruits and 
vegetables such as papaya (paw paw), mango, 
and squash. Whole milk, eggs, and liver are 
also rich in vitamin A.
♦   If the child is not likely to get these foods, or 
if he is developing signs of night blindness or 
xerophthalmia, give him vitamin A. 200,000 units 
(60 mg. retinol, in capsule or liquid) once every 
6 months (p. 391). Babies under 1 year of age 
should get 100,000 units.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
227
♦ If the condition is already fairly severe, give the child 200,000 units of vitamin A 
by mouth the first day. 200,000 units the second day, and 200,000 units 14 days 
later. Babies under 1 year old should get half that amount (100,000 units).
♦ In communities where xerophthalmia is common, give 200,000 units of vitamin 
A once every 6 months to women who are breastfeeding, and also to pregnant 
women during the second half of their pregnancy.
WARNING: Too much vitamin A is poisonous. Do not give more than the amounts 
advised here.
If the condition of the child’s eye is severe, with a dull, pitted, or bulging cornea, 
get medical help. The child’s eye should be bandaged, and he should receive 
vitamin A at once, preferably an injection of 100,000 units in the muscle.
SPOTS OR ‘FLIES’ BEFORE THE EYES  
(MOUCHES VOLANTES)
Sometimes older persons complain of small moving spots when they look at a 
bright surface (wall, sky). The spots move when the eyes move and look like tiny 
flies. These spots are usually harmless and need no treatment. But if they appear 
suddenly in large numbers and vision begins to fail from one side, this could be a 
medical emergency (detached retina). Seek medical help at once.
DOUBLE VISION
Seeing double can have many causes.
If double vision comes suddenly, is chronic, or 
gradually gets worse, it is probably a sign of a serious 
problem. Seek medical help.
If double vision occurs only from time to time, it may be a sign of weakness or 
exhaustion, perhaps from malnutrition. Read Chapter 11 on good nutrition and try to 
eat as well as possible. If sight does not improve, get medical help.
RIVER BLINDNESS (ONCHOCERCIASIS)
This disease is common in many parts of Africa and certain 
areas of southern Mexico, Central America, and northern South 
America. The infection is caused by tiny worms that are carried 
from person to person by small, hump backed flies or gnats 
known as black flies (simulids).
The worms are ‘injected’ into a person when an infected 
black fly bites him.
Dark green leafy vegetables, and yellow or orange fruits 
and vegetables, help prevent blindness in children.
BLACK FLY
actual size
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
228
•	 If the disease is not treated, the skin gradually becomes more wrinkled, like an old 
man’s. White spots and patches may appear on the front of the lower legs. A dry 
rash may appear on the lower limbs and trunk.
•	 Eye problems often lead to blindness. First there may be redness and tears, then 
signs of iritis (p. 221). The cornea becomes dull and pitted as in xerophthalmia 
(p. 226). Finally, sight is lost because of corneal scarring, cataract, glaucoma, or 
other problems.
Treatment of river blindness:
Early treatment can prevent blindness. In areas where river blindness is known to 
occur, seek medical testing and treatment when the first signs appear.
♦ Ivermectin (Mectizan) is the best medicine for river blindness, and it may be 
available at no cost through your local health department. Diethylcarbamazine and 
suramin are other medicines used to treat river blindness, but these can sometimes 
do more harm than good, especially when eye damage has already begun. They 
should only be given by experienced health workers. For dosage and precautions 
on all these medicines, see p. 377.
♦ Antihistamines help reduce itching (p. 385).
♦ Early surgical removal of the lumps lowers the number of worms.
Prevention:
♦ Black flies breed in fast-running water. Clearing brush and vegetation back from the 
banks of fast-running streams may help reduce the number.
♦ Avoid sleeping out-of-doors—especially in the daytime, which is when the flies 
usually bite.
♦ Cooperate with programs for the control of black flies.
♦ Early treatment prevents blindness and reduces spread of the disease.
Signs of river blindness:
•	 Several months after a black fly bites and the 
worms enter the body, lumps begin to form 
under the skin. In the Americas the lumps are 
most common on the head and upper body; in 
Africa on the chest, the lower body, and thighs. 
Often there are no more than 3 to 6 lumps. They 
grow slowly to a size of 2 to 3 cm. across. They 
are usually painless.
•	 There may be itching when the baby worms are 
spreading.
•	 Pains in the back, shoulder or hip joints, or 
‘general pains all over’.
•	 Enlargement of the lymph nodes in the groin.
•	 Thickening of the skin on the back or belly, with 
big pores like the skin of an orange. To see this, 
look at the skin with light shining across it from 
one side.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
229
CARE OF THE TEETH AND GUMS
Taking good care of teeth and gums is important because:
•   Strong, healthy teeth are needed to chew and digest food well.
•   Painful cavities (holes in the teeth caused by decay) and sore gums can be 
prevented by good tooth care.
•   Decayed or rotten teeth caused by lack of cleanliness can lead to serious 
infections that may affect other parts of the body.
To keep the teeth and gums healthy:
1. Avoid sweets. Eating a lot of sweets (sugar 
cane, candy, pastry, tea or coffee with sugar, soft 
or fizzy drinks like colas) rots the teeth quickly.
Do not accustom children to sweets or soft 
drinks if you want them to have good teeth.
2. Brush teeth well every day—and always brush immediately after eating 
anything sweet. Start brushing your children’s teeth as the teeth appear. Later, teach 
them to brush their teeth themselves, and watch to see that they do it right.
3. In areas where there is not enough natural fluoride in water and foods, putting 
fluoride in the drinking water or directly on teeth helps prevent cavities. Some health 
programs put fluoride on children’s teeth once or twice a year. Also, most foods from 
the sea contain a large amount of fluoride.
CAUTION: Fluoride is poisonous if more than a small amount is swallowed. Use 
with care and keep it out of the reach of children. Before adding fluoride to drinking 
water, try to get the water tested to see how much fluoride is needed.
“This child has  
a sweet tooth—
but soon he’ll 
have no more” 
(no more teeth).
Brush the teeth 
from top to bottom 
like this,
not just from side 
to side.
Brush the front, 
back, top, and 
bottom of all teeth.
CHAPTER
17
The Teeth, 
Gums, and Mouth
230
4. Do not bottle feed older babies. Continual sucking on a bottle bathes the 
baby’s teeth in sweet liquid and causes early decay. (It is best not to bottle feed at all. 
See p. 271.)
A TOOTHBRUSH IS NOT NECESSARY
You can use the twig of a tree, like this:
TOOTHPASTE IS NOT NECESSARY
Just water is enough, if you rub well. Rubbing the teeth and gums with something 
soft but a little rough is what cleans them. Some people rub their teeth with powdered 
charcoal or with salt. Or you can make a tooth powder by mixing salt and bicarbonate 
of soda (baking soda) in equal amounts. To make it stick, wet the brush before putting it 
in the powder.
IF A TOOTH ALREADY HAS A CAVITY (a hole caused by rot)
To keep it from hurting as much or forming an abscess, avoid 
sweet things and brush well after every meal.
If possible, see a dental worker right away, if you go soon 
enough, he can often clean and fill the tooth so it will last for  
many years.
When you have a tooth with a cavity, do not wait until it hurts a lot. 
Have it filled by a dental worker right away.
Sharpen this end to clean 
between the teeth.
Chew on this end and use 
the fibers as a brush.
Or tie a piece of rough towel around the end of a stick 
or wrap it around your finger, and use it as a toothbrush.
piece of 
rough towel
bicarbonate 
of soda
salt
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
231
TOOTHACHES AND ABSCESSES
To calm the pain:
♦  Clean the hole in the tooth wall, removing 
all food particles. Then rinse the mouth 
with warm salt water.
♦  Take a pain medicine like aspirin.
♦  If the tooth infection is severe (swelling, 
pus, large tender lymph nodes), use an 
antibiotic: tablets of penicillin (p. 351), 
amoxicillin, or ampicillin (p. 352). People 
allergic to medicines in the penicillin family 
can take erythromycin (p. 354).
If the pain and swelling do not go away or 
keep coming back, the tooth should probably 
be pulled.
Treat abscesses right away—before the 
infection spreads to other parts of the body.
AN INFECTION OF THE GUMS (PYORRHEA)
Inflamed (red and swollen), painful gums 
that bleed easily are caused by:
1. Not cleaning the teeth and gums 
well or often enough.
2. Not eating enough nutritious foods 
(malnutrition).
Prevention and treatment:
♦ 	 Brush teeth well after each meal, removing food that sticks between the teeth. 
Also, if possible, scrape off the dark yellow crust (tartar) that forms where the 
teeth meet the gums. It helps to clean under the gums regularly by passing a 
strong thin thread (or dental floss) between the teeth. At first this will cause a 
lot of bleeding, but soon the gums will be healthier and bleed less.
♦	 Eat protective foods rich in vitamins, especially eggs, meat, beans, dark green 
vegetables, and fruits like oranges, lemons, and tomatoes (see Chapter 11). 
Avoid sweet, sticky, and stringy foods that get stuck between the teeth.
Note: Sometimes medicines for seizures (epilepsy), such as phenytoin (Dilantin), 
cause swelling and unhealthy growth of the gums (see p. 389). If this happens, 
consult a health worker and consider using a different medicine.
A toothache results when a cavity 
becomes infected.
An abscess results when the 
infection reaches the tip of a root 
and forms a pocket of pus.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
232
SORES OR CRACKS AT THE CORNERS OF THE MOUTH
Narrow sores at the corners of children’s  
mouths are often a sign of malnutrition.
Children with these sores should eat foods rich 
in vitamins and proteins: like milk, meat, fish, nuts, 
eggs, fruits, and green vegetables.
WHITE PATCHES OR SPOTS IN THE MOUTH
The tongue is coated with white ‘fur’. Many illnesses 
cause a white or yellowish coating on the tongue and roof of 
the mouth. This is common when there is a fever. Although 
this coating is not serious, it helps to rinse the mouth with 
a solution of warm water with salt and bicarbonate of soda 
several times a day.
Tiny white spots, like salt grains, in the mouth of a child 
with fever may be an early sign of measles (p. 311).
Thrush: small white patches on the inside of the mouth 
and tongue that look like milk curds stuck to raw meat. They 
are caused by a fungus or yeast infection called moniliasis 
(see p. 242). Thrush is common in newborn babies, in 
persons with HIV, and in persons using certain antibiotics, 
especially tetracycline or ampicillin.
Unless it is very important to keep taking the antibiotic, 
stop taking it. Use nystatin (p. 372) or paint the inside of 
the mouth with gentian violet. Eating yogurt may also help. 
In very severe cases, or if thrush moves into the throat 
and makes it hard to swallow, consult a health worker. A 
stronger medicine may be needed. 
Canker sores: small, white, painful spots inside the 
lip or mouth. May appear after fever or stress (worry). In 
1 to 3 weeks they go away. Rinse mouth with salt water. 
Antibiotics do not help.
COLD SORES AND FEVER BLISTERS
Small painful blisters on lips (or genitals) that break and form scabs. May appear 
after fever or stress. Caused by a herpes virus. They heal after 1 or 2 weeks. Holding 
ice on the sores for several minutes, several times a day may help them to heal faster. 
Putting alum, camphor, or bitter plant juices (such as Cardon cactus, p. 13) on them 
may help. Taking acyclovir (p. 373) can make cold sores less painful. For information 
about herpes on the genitals, see p. 402.
For more information on caring for the teeth and gums, see Where There Is No 
Dentist, also available from Hesperian.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
233
The Urinary System 
and the Genitals
The urinary system or tract serves the body by removing waste material from 
the blood and getting rid of it in the form of urine:
The kidneys 
filter the 
blood and 
form the 
urine.
The ureters 
are tubes 
that carry 
urine to the 
bladder.
The bladder is a bag that stores the 
urine. As it fills, it stretches and gets 
bigger.
The urine tube 
or urinary canal 
(urethra) carries 
urine out through 
the penis in men or 
to a small opening 
between the lips of 
the vagina in women.
The genitals are the sex organs.
The man:
bladder
urine canal
sperm tube
penis or 
male sex 
organ
scrotum or 
sac that holds 
the testicles
The woman:
outer lips 
of the 
vagina
inner lips
anus: end of 
the intestine
clitoris: a very sensitive 
spot that can give 
sexual pleasure when 
touched
urinary opening: hole 
where urine comes out
opening to the vagina or 
birth canal. (For inside 
view, see p. 280.)
The prostate gland makes the 
liquid that carries the sperm.
The testicles make the 
sperm, or microscopic 
cells with tails that join 
with the egg of a woman 
and make her pregnant.
18
CHAPTER
234
PROBLEMS OF THE URINARY TRACT
There are many different problems of the urinary tract. They are not always easy to 
tell apart. And the same illness can show itself differently in men and women. Some 
of these problems are not serious, while others can be very dangerous. A dangerous 
illness may begin with only mild signs. It is often difficult to identify these problems 
correctly by simply using a book like this one. Special knowledge and tests may be 
needed. When possible, seek advice from a health worker.
Common problems with urinating include:
1.  Urinary tract infections. These are most common in women. (Sometimes they start 
after sexual contact, but may come at other times, especially during pregnancy.)
2.  Kidney stones, or bladder stones.
3.  Prostate trouble (difficulty passing urine caused by an enlarged prostate gland; 
most common in older men).
4.  Gonorrhea or chlamydia (infectious diseases spread by sexual contact that often 
cause difficulty or pain in passing urine).
5.  In some parts of the world schistosomiasis (blood flukes) is the most common 
cause of blood in the urine. This is discussed with other worm infections. See 
page 146.
Urinary Tract Infections
•	 Sometimes it feels 
as though the 
bladder does not 
empty completely.
•	 Sometimes there 
is pain in the lower 
back (kidneys). 
•	 Sometimes the pain 
seems to go down 
the legs.
•	 In serious cases 
(kidney disease) the 
feet and face may 
swell.
•	 Sometimes fever and chills 
or headache.
•	 Sometimes pain 
in the side.
•	 Painful urination 
and need to urinate 
very often.
•	 Unable to hold in urine 
(especially true for 
children).
•	 Urine may be 
cloudy or reddish 
(bloody).
Signs:
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
235
Many women suffer from urinary infections. In men they are much less common. 
Sometimes the only symptoms are painful urination and the need to urinate often. 
Other common signs are blood in the urine and pain in the lower belly. Pain in 
the mid or lower back, often spreading around the sides below the ribs, with fever, 
indicates a more serious problem.
Treatment:
♦ Drink a lot of water. Many minor urinary 
infections can be cured by simply drinking a lot 
of water, without the need for medicine. Drink at 
least 1 glass every 30 minutes for 3 to 4 hours, 
and get into the habit of drinking lots of water. 
(But if the person cannot urinate or has swelling 
of the hands and face, she should not drink 
much water.)
♦ If the person does not get better by drinking a lot of water, or if she has a fever, 
she should take cotrimoxazole (p. 357) or amoxicillin (p. 352). Pay careful 
attention to dosage and precautions. To completely control the infection it 
may be necessary to take the medicine for 10 days. If the infection moves into 
the kidneys or if these medicines do not work, try ciprofloxacin (p. 358). It is 
important to drink a lot of water while taking these medicines.
♦ If the person does not get better quickly, seek medical advice.
Kidney or Bladder Stones
Signs:
•	 The first sign is often sharp or severe pain in the lower back, the side, or the 
lower belly, or in the base of the penis in men.
•	 Sometimes the urinary tube is blocked so the person has difficulty passing 
urine—or cannot pass any. Or drops of blood may come out when the person 
begins to urinate.
•	 There may be a urinary infection at the same time.
Treatment:
♦ The same as for the urinary infections described above.
♦ Also give aspirin or another painkiller and an antispasmodic (see p. 380).
♦ If you cannot pass urine, try to do it lying down. This sometimes allows a stone 
in the bladder to roll back and free the opening to the urinary tube.
♦ In severe cases, get medical help. Sometimes surgery is needed.
Enlarged Prostate Gland
This condition is most common in men over 40 years old. It is caused by a 
swelling  of the prostate gland, which is between the bladder and the urinary tube 
(urethra).
•	 The person has difficulty in passing urine and sometimes in having a bowel 
movement. The urine may only dribble or drip or become blocked completely. 
Sometimes the man is not able to urinate for days.
•	 If he has a fever, this is a sign that infection is also present.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
236
Treatment for an enlarged prostate:
♦	 If the person cannot urinate, he should try 
sitting in a tub of hot water, like this:  
If this does not work, a catheter may be 
needed (p. 239).
♦	 If he has a fever, use an antibiotic such as 
ampicillin (p. 352) or tetracycline (p. 355). 
♦	 Get medical help. Serious or chronic cases 
may require surgery.
Note: Both prostate trouble and gonorrhea (or chlamydia) can also make it hard to pass 
urine. In older men it is more likely to be an enlarged prostate. However, a younger 
man—especially one who has recently had sex with a person with gonorrhea or 
chlamydia—probably has gonorrhea or chlamydia.
infections SPREAD BY SEX 
(SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED infections)
On the following pages, we discuss some common infections spread by sexual 
contact (STIs): gonorrhea, chlamydia, syphilis, and bubos. For information on HIV and 
AIDS and some sexually transmitted infections that cause sores on the genitals (genital 
herpes, genital warts, and chancroid) see Additional Information, p. 399 to 403.
Gonorrhea (clap, VD, the drip) and Chlamydia
Both men and women can have gonorrhea or chlamydia without any signs. 
Gonorrhea and chlamydia can have the same signs, though gonorrhea usually starts 
sooner and is more painful. Both men and women can have gonorrhea and chlamydia 
at the same time so it is best to treat for both. If not treated, either gonorrhea or 
chlamydia can make a man or a woman sterile (unable to have a baby).
If a pregnant woman with gonorrhea or chlamydia is not treated before giving birth, 
the infection may get in the baby’s eyes and make him blind (see p. 221).
Signs in the man:
•	 Drops of pus from the penis
•	 Sometimes there is painful 
swelling of the testicles
Signs in the woman:
•	 Yellow or green discharge 
from the vagina or anus
•	 Pain in the lower belly (pelvic 
inflammatory disease, p. 243)
•	 Fever
•	 Pain during sex
Signs in both the man and  
the woman:
•	 Pain or burning during  
urination (peeing)
•	 Rash or sores all over the body
•	 Painful swelling in one or both 
knees, ankles, or wrists
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
237
In a man, the first signs begin 2 to 5 days (or up to 3 weeks or more) after sexual 
contact with an infected person. In a woman, signs may not show up for weeks or 
months. But a person who does not show any signs can still give the disease to 
someone else, starting a few days after becoming infected.
Treatment:
♦ In the past, gonorrhea was usually treated with penicillin. But now in many 
areas the disease has become resistant to penicillin, so other antibiotics must 
be used. It is best to seek local advice about which medicines are effective, 
available, and affordable in your area. Medicines used to treat gonorrhea and 
chlamydia are listed on p. 359. If the drip and pain have not gone away in 
2 or 3 days after trying a treatment, the gonorrhea could be resistant to the 
medicine, or the person could have chlamydia.
♦ If a woman has gonorrhea or chlamydia and also has fever and pain in the 
lower belly, she may have pelvic inflammatory disease (see p. 243).
♦ Everyone who has had sex with a person known to have gonorrhea or 
chlamydia should also be treated, especially wives of men who are infected. 
Even if the wife shows no signs, she is probably infected. If she is not treated at 
the same time, she will give the disease back to her husband again.
♦ Protect the eyes of all newborn babies from chlamydia and especially 
gonorrhea, which can cause blindness (see p. 221). 
CAUTION: A person with gonorrhea or chlamydia may also have syphilis without 
knowing it. Sometimes it is best to go ahead and give the full treatment for syphilis, 
because the gonorrhea or chlamydia treatment may prevent the first syphilis 
symptoms, but may not cure the disease.
For prevention of these and other sexually transmitted infections, see p. 239.
Syphilis
Syphilis is a common and dangerous infection that is 
spread from person to person through sexual contact.
Signs:
•	 The first sign is usually a sore, called a chancre.  
It appears 2 to 5 weeks after sexual contact with a 
person who has syphilis. The chancre may look like  
a pimple, a blister, or an open sore. It usually 
appears in the genital area of the man or woman (or 
less commonly on the lips, fingers, anus, or mouth). 
This sore is full of germs, which are easily passed 
on to another person. The sore is usually painless, and if 
it is inside the vagina, a woman may not know she has 
it but it can easily spread to other people. If the sore is 
painful, it may be chancroid (see p. 403).
•	 The sore lasts only a few days and then goes away by itself 
without treatment. But the disease continues spreading 
through the body.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
238
•	 Weeks or months later, there may be sore throat, mild fever, mouth sores, or swollen 
joints. Or any of these signs may appear on the skin:
All of these signs usually go away by themselves, making the person think he is well—
but the disease continues. Without adequate treatment, syphilis can invade any part 
of the body, causing heart disease, paralysis, insanity, and many other problems.
Note: Yaws shares many of the same signs as syphilis (see p. 202).
CAUTION: If any strange rash or skin condition shows up days or weeks after a pimple or 
sore appears on the genitals, it may be syphilis. Get medical advice.
Treatment for syphilis: (For complete cure, the full treatment is essential.)
♦	 If signs have been present less than 1 year, inject 2.4 million units of benzathine 
penicillin all at once, half the dose in each buttock (see p. 352). If allergic to penicillin, 
take tetracycline or erythromycin by mouth, 500 mg., 4 times a day for 15 days.
♦	 If signs have been present more than 1 year, inject 2.4 million units of benzathine 
penicillin—half in each buttock—once a week for 3 weeks, for a total of 7.2 million 
units. If allergic to penicillin, take either tetracycline or erythromycin, 500 mg., 4 
times each day for 30 days.
♦	 If there is any chance that someone has syphilis, she should immediately see a 
health worker. Special blood tests may be needed. If tests cannot be made, the 
person should be treated for syphilis in any case.
♦	 Everyone who has had sexual contact with a person known to have syphilis should 
also be treated, especially husbands or wives of those known to be infected.
Note: Pregnant or breastfeeding women who are allergic to penicillin can take 
erythromycin in the same dosage as tetracycline (see p. 355).
To prevent syphilis, see the next page.
Bubos: Bursting Lymph Nodes in the Groin 
(Lymphogranuloma Venereum)
Signs:
•	 In a man: Large, dark lumps in the groin that open to drain 
pus, scar up, and open again.
•	 In a woman: Lymph nodes similar to those in the man. Or 
painful, oozing sores in the anus.
Treatment:
♦	 See a health worker.
♦	 Give adults 500 mg. of erythromycin, 4 times a day for 14 to 21 days. Or give 
doxycycline, 100 mg., 2 times a day for 14 to 21 days. 
♦	 Avoid sex until the sores are completely healed.
Note: Bubos in the groin can also be a sign of chancroid (see p. 403).
a painful rash or ‘pimples’ 
all over the body
ring-shaped welts 
(like hives)
an itchy rash on the 
hands or feet
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
239
HOW TO PREVENT SPREADING SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED infections
1. Be careful with whom you have sex: Someone who has sex with many 
different persons is more likely to catch these infections. Prostitutes are especially 
likely to be infected. To avoid infection, have sex with only one faithful partner. If you 
or your partner have sex with anyone else, always use a condom. 
2. Get treatment right away: It is very important that all persons infected with 
a sexually transmitted infection get treatment at once so that they do not infect 
other people. Having one STI also makes it easier to become infected with HIV or 
other STIs. Do not have sex with anyone until 3 days after treatment is finished. 
(Unfortunately there is still no cure for HIV. See p. 397.)
3. Tell other people if they need treatment: When a person finds out that he or 
she has a sexually transmitted infection, he should tell everyone with whom he has 
had sex, so that they can get treatment, too. It is especially important that a man tell 
a woman, because without knowing she has the disease she can pass it on to other 
people, her babies may become infected or blind, and in time she may become 
sterile or very ill herself.
4. Help others: Insist that friends who may have a sexually transmitted infection 
get treatment at once, and that they avoid all sexual contact until they are cured.
HOW AND WHEN TO USE A CATHETER  
(A RUBBER TUBE TO DRAIN URINE FROM THE BLADDER)
When to use and when not to use  
a catheter:
•	 Never use a catheter unless it is absolutely necessary and it is impossible 
to get medical help in time. Even careful use of a catheter sometimes causes 
dangerous infection or damages the urinary canal.
•	 If any urine is coming out at all, do not use the catheter.
•	 If the person cannot urinate, first have him try to urinate while sitting in a tub 
of warm water (p. 236). Begin the recommended medicine (for gonorrhea or 
prostate trouble) at once.
•	 If the person has a very full, painful bladder and cannot urinate,  
or if he or she begins to show signs of poisoning from urine, then and only then 
use a catheter.
Signs of urine poisoning (uremia):
•	 The breath smells like urine.
•	 The feet and face swell.
•	 Vomiting, distress, confusion.
Note: People who have suffered from difficulty 
urinating, enlarged prostate, or kidney stones should buy a catheter and keep it 
handy in case of emergency.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
240
HOW TO PUT IN A CATHETER
1. Boil the 
catheter (and 
any syringe 
or instrument 
you may be 
using) for  
15 minutes.
6. Cover the catheter 
with a sterile lubricant 
(slippery cream) like 
K-Y Jelly that dissolves 
in water (not oil or 
Vaseline).
2. Wash well under foreskin or between 
vaginal lips and surrounding areas.
7. Pull back foreskin or open the vaginal lips.
and wipe the 
urine opening 
with a sterile 
cotton wetted 
with soap.
8. Holding the foreskin back or the lips open, 
gently put the catheter into the urine hole. 
Twist it as necessary but DO NOT FORCE IT.
3. Wash hands—if possible with 
surgical soap 
(like Betadine). 
After washing, 
touch only things 
that are sterile or 
very clean.
4. Put very clean cloths 
under and around the area.
Hold the penis straight 
at this angle.
9. Push the catheter 
in until urine starts 
coming out. For a 
man, then push it 
in 3 cm. more. 
Note: A 
woman’s 
urinary tube is 
much shorter 
than a man’s.
5. Put on sterile gloves 
or rub hands well with 
alcohol or surgical soap.
Sometimes a woman cannot urinate after giving birth. If more than 6 hours pass and 
her bladder seems full, she may need a catheter put in. If her bladder does not feel full, 
do not use a catheter but have her drink lots of water.
For more information on catheter use, see Disabled Village Children, Chapter 25.
Important: If the person shows signs of 
urine poisoning, or if the bladder has been 
over-full and stretched, do not let the urine 
come out all at once: instead, let it out very 
slowly (by pinching or plugging the catheter), 
little by little over an hour or 2.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
241
PROBLEMS OF WOMEN
Vaginal Discharge
(a mucus or pus-like stuff that comes from the vagina)
All women normally have a small amount of vaginal discharge, which is clear, 
milky, or slightly yellow. If there is no itching or bad smell, there is probably no 
problem.
But many women, especially during pregnancy, suffer from a discharge often 
with itching in the vagina. This discharge may be caused by various infections. 
Most of them are bothersome, but not dangerous. However, an infection caused by 
gonorrhea or chlamydia can harm a baby at birth (see p. 221).
1. A thin and foamy, greenish-yellow or whitish, foul-smelling discharge 
with itching. This is probably an infection of Trichomonas. It may burn to urinate. 
Sometimes the genitals hurt or are swollen. The discharge may contain blood.
Treatment:
♦ It is very important to keep the genitals 
clean.
♦ A vaginal wash, or douche, with warm 
water and distilled vinegar will help. If there 
is no vinegar, use lemon juice in water.
For the douche, use 
6 teaspoons of vinegar 
in 1 liter of boiled, 
cooled water.
IMPORTANT: Let water enter 
slowly during about 3 minutes. 
Do not put the tube more than 
3 inches into the vagina.
CAUTION: Do not douche in the last 4 weeks of pregnancy, or for 6 weeks after 
giving birth. If the discharge is troublesome, nystatin vaginal inserts may help 
(see #2 on the next page).
♦	 You can also use a clove of garlic as a vaginal insert. (Peel the garlic, taking care not 
to puncture it. Wrap it in a piece of clean cloth or gauze, and put it into the vagina.)
♦	 Use the douche 2 times during the day, and each night insert a new clove of 
garlic. Do this for 10 to 14 days.
♦	 If this does not help, use vaginal inserts that contain metronidazole or other 
medication recommended for Trichomonas, or take metronidazole by mouth. 
For precautions and instructions, see page 368.
IMPORTANT: It is likely that the husband of a woman with Trichomonas has the 
infection, too, even though he does not feel anything. (Some men with Trichomonas 
have a burning feeling when urinating.) If a woman is treated with metronidazole, her 
husband should also take it by mouth at the same time.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
242
2. White discharge that looks like cottage cheese or buttermilk, and smells like 
mold, mildew, or baking bread. This could be a yeast infection (moniliasis, Candida). 
Itching may be severe. The lips of the vagina often look bright red and hurt. It may 
burn to urinate. This infection is especially common in pregnant women or in those who 
are sick, diabetic (p. 127), have HIV infection, or have been taking antibiotics, or birth 
control pills.
Treatment: Douche with vinegar-water (see p. 241) or dilute gentian violet, 2 parts 
gentian violet to 100 parts water (2 teaspoons to a half liter). Or use nystatin vaginal 
tablets or other vaginal inserts for Candida, like miconazole or clotrimazole. For dosage 
and instructions see page 372. Putting unsweetened yogurt in the vagina is said to 
be a useful home remedy to help control yeast infections. Never use antibiotics for a 
yeast infection. They can make it worse.
3. Thick, milky discharge with a rancid smell. This could be an infection caused 
by bacteria. Special tests may be needed to tell this from a Trichomonas infection. 
Douche with vinegar-water (p. 241), or with povidone-iodine (Betadine: 6 teaspoons 
in 1 liter of water). Also, you can try inserting a clove of garlic every night for 2 weeks 
(see p. 241). If none of these treatments works, try metronidazole (see p. 368).
4. Watery, brown, or gray discharge, streaked with blood; bad smell; pain 
in the lower belly. These are signs of more serious infections, or possibly cancer 
(p. 280). If there is fever, use antibiotics (if possible, ampicillin together with 
tetracycline—see p. 352 and 355). Get medical help right away.
Important: If any discharge lasts a long time, or does not get better with treatment, 
see a health worker.
How a Woman Can Avoid Many Infections:
1. Keep the genital area clean. When you bathe (daily if possible) wash well with 
mild soap.
2. Urinate after sexual contact. This helps prevent urinary infections (but will not 
prevent pregnancy).
3. Be sure to clean yourself carefully after each bowel movement. Always wipe from 
front to back:
Wiping forward can spread germs, amebas, or worms into the urinary opening and 
vagina. Also take care to wipe little girls’ bottoms from front to back and to teach them, 
as they grow up, to do it the same way.
this way
YES
NOT
this way
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
243
Pain or Discomfort 
in the Lower Central Part of a Woman’s Belly
This can come from many different causes,  
which are discussed in different parts of this 
book. The following list, which includes a few key 
questions, will help you know where to look.
Possible causes of pain in the lower belly are:
1. Menstrual discomfort (p. 246). Is it worse 
shortly before or during the period?
2. A bladder infection (p. 234). One of the 
most common low mid-belly pains. Is urination very 
frequent or painful?
3. Pelvic inflammatory disease. This is a late 
stage of gonorrhea or chlamydia (p. 236), with pain 
in the lower belly and fever. Pelvic infection can also 
happen after birth, abortion, miscarriage, or inserting 
an IUD. Treat for gonorrhea and chlamydia, but in 
addition to giving the medicines on page 359, also 
give 500 mg. of metronidazole 3 times a day for 14 
days. If the woman is using an intrauterine device 
(IUD), it may need to be removed. See a health worker.
4. Problems that are related to a lump or mass in 
the lower part of the belly. These are discussed briefly 
on page 280 and include ovarian cyst and cancer. 
A special exam is needed, done by a trained health 
worker.
5. Ectopic pregnancy (when the baby begins to develop outside the womb 
(p. 280). Usually there is severe pain with irregular bleeding. The woman often has 
signs of early pregnancy (see p. 247), and feels dizzy and weak. Get medical help 
immediately; her life is in danger.
6. Complications from an abortion (p. 414). There may be fever, bleeding 
from the vagina with clots, belly pain, difficulty urinating, and shock. Start giving 
antibiotics as for childbirth fever (p. 276), and get the woman to a hospital at 
once. Her life is in danger.
7. An infection or other problem of the gut or rectum (p. 145). Is the pain 
related to eating or to bowel movements?
Some of the above problems are not serious. Others are dangerous. They are not 
always easy to tell apart. Special tests or examinations may be needed. If you are 
unsure what is causing the pain, or if it does not get better soon, seek medical 
help. For more information on treating women’s health problems, see Where Women 
Have No Doctor.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
244
MEN AND WOMEN WHO ARE NOT ABLE
TO HAVE CHILDREN (INFERTILITY)
Sometimes a man and woman try to have children but the woman does not become 
pregnant. Either the man or woman may be infertile (unable to bring about pregnancy). 
Often nothing can be done to make a person fertile, but sometimes something can be 
done, depending on the cause.
COMMON CAUSES OF INFERTILITY:
1. Sterility. The person’s body is such that he or she can never have children. Some 
men and women are born sterile.
2. Weaknesses or a nutritional lack. In some women severe anemia, poor nutrition, 
or lack of iodine may lower the chance of becoming pregnant. Or it may cause 
the unformed baby (embryo) to die, perhaps before the mother even knows she is 
pregnant (see Miscarriage, p. 281). A woman who is not able to become pregnant, or 
has had only miscarriages, should get enough nutritious food, use iodized salt, and 
if she is severely anemic, take iron pills (p. 247). These may increase her chance of 
becoming pregnant and having a healthy baby.
3. Chronic infection, especially pelvic inflammatory disease (see p. 243) due to 
gonorrhea or chlamydia, is a common cause of infertility in women. Treatment may 
help—if the disease has not gone too far. Prevention and early treatment of gonorrhea 
and chlamydia mean fewer sterile women.
4. Men are sometimes unable to make women pregnant because they have fewer 
sperm than is normal. It may help for the man to wait, without having sex, for several 
days before the woman enters her ‘fertile days’ each month, midway between her last 
menstrual period and the next (see Counting Days Method and Mucus Method, p. 291 
and 292). This way he will give her his full amount of sperm when they have sex on 
days when she is able to become pregnant.
WARNING: Hormones and other medicines commonly given to men or women who 
cannot have babies almost never do any good, especially in men. Home remedies and 
magic cures are not likely to help either. Be careful not to waste your money on things 
that will not help.
For a man or a woman who is not able to have a baby, there are still many ways to 
raise or support children and to lead a happy life:
•	 Perhaps you can arrange to care for or adopt children 
who are orphans or need a home. Many couples come to 
love such children just as if they were their own.
•	 Perhaps you can become a health worker or help your 
community in other ways. The love you would give to your 
children, you can give to others, and all will benefit.
•	 You may live in a village where people look with shame 
on a woman who cannot have children. Perhaps you 
and others can form a group to help care for people 
with special needs or to make other contributions to the 
community, and to show that having babies is not the only 
thing that makes a woman worthwhile.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
245
THE MENSTRUAL PERIOD 
(MONTHLY BLEEDING IN WOMEN)
Most girls have their first ‘period’ or monthly bleeding between the ages of  
11 and 16. This means that they are now old enough to become pregnant.
The normal period comes once every 28 days or so, and lasts 3 to 6 days 
However, this varies a lot in different women.
Irregular or painful periods are common in adolescent (teenage) girls. This does 
not usually mean there is anything wrong.
If your menstrual period is painful:
There is no need for you to 
stay in bed. In fact, lying 
quietly can make the pain 
worse.
It often helps to walk around 
and do light work or
exercises . . .
or to take hot drinks, or put 
your feet in hot water.
CHAPTER
19
Information for Mothers
and Midwives
If it is very painful, it may help to take aspirin (p. 378) or ibuprofen (p. 379) and to 
lie down and put warm compresses on the belly.
During the period—as at all times—a woman should take care to keep clean, get 
enough sleep, and eat a well balanced diet. She can eat everything she normally 
eats and can continue to do her usual work. It is not harmful to have sex during the 
menstrual period. (However, if one of the partners has HIV, the risk of infecting the 
other partner may be higher.)
246
Signs of menstrual problems:
•	 Some irregularity in the length of time between periods is normal for certain 
women, but for others it may be a sign of chronic illness, anemia, malnutrition, 
tuberculosis, worsening HIV infection, or possibly an infection or tumor in the 
womb.
•	 If a period does not come when it should, this may be a sign of pregnancy. But for 
many girls who have recently begun to menstruate, and for women over 40, it is 
often normal to miss or have irregular periods. Worry or emotional upset may also 
cause a woman to miss her period.
•	 If the bleeding comes later than expected, is more severe, and lasts longer, it may 
be a miscarriage (see p. 281).
•	 If the menstrual period lasts more than 6 days, results in unusually heavy 
bleeding, or comes more than once a month, seek medical advice.
THE MENOPAUSE
(WHEN WOMEN STOP HAVING PERIODS)
The menopause or climacteric is the time in a woman’s life 
when the menstrual periods stop coming. After menopause, 
she can no longer bear children. In general, this ‘change of life’ 
happens between the ages of 40 and 50. The periods often 
become irregular for several months before they stop completely.
There is no reason to stop having sex during or after the 
menopause. But a woman can still become pregnant during this 
time. If she does not want to have more children, she should 
continue to use birth control for 12 months after her periods stop.
When menopause begins, a woman may think she is pregnant. 
And when she bleeds again after 3 or 4 months, she may think 
she is having a miscarriage. If a woman of 40 or 50 starts bleeding again after some 
months without, explain to her that it may be menopause.
During menopause, it is normal to feel many discomforts—anxiety, distress, ‘hot 
flashes’ (suddenly feeling uncomfortably hot), pains that travel all over the body, 
sadness, etc. After menopause is over, most women feel better again.
Women who have severe bleeding or a lot of pain in the belly during menopause, or 
who begin to bleed again after the bleeding has stopped for months or years, should 
seek medical help. An examination is needed to make sure they do not have cancer or 
another serious problem (see p. 280).
After menopause, a woman’s bones may become weaker and break more easily. 
To prevent this, it helps to eat foods with calcium (see p. 116).
Because she will not have any more children, a woman may be more free now to 
spend time with her grandchildren or to become more active in the community. Some 
become midwives or health workers at this time in their lives.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
247
PREGNANCY
Signs of pregnancy:
All these signs are normal:
•	 The woman misses her period (often 
the first sign).
•	 ‘Morning sickness’ (nausea or feeling 
you are going to vomit, especially in 
the morning). This is worse during 
the second and third months of 
pregnancy.
•	 She may have to urinate more often.
•	 The belly gets bigger.
•	 The breasts get bigger or feel tender.
•	 ‘Mask of pregnancy’ (dark areas on the 
face, breasts, and belly).
•	 Finally, during the fifth month or so, the child begins to move in the womb.
For more information on pregnancy and birth, see A Book for Midwives. 
How to Stay Healthy during Pregnancy
♦	 Most important is to eat enough to gain weight regularly especially if you are 
thin. It is also important to eat well. The body needs food rich in proteins, 
vitamins, and minerals, especially iron (see Chapter 11).
♦ 	 Use iodized salt to increase the chances that the child will be born alive and 
will not have learning difficulties. (But to avoid swelling of the feet and other 
problems, do not use very much salt.)
♦ 	 Keep clean. Bathe or wash regularly and brush your teeth every day.
♦ 	 In the last month of pregnancy, do not use a vaginal douche.
♦ 	 Avoid taking medicines. Some medicines can harm the developing baby. As 
a rule, only take medicines recommended by a health worker or doctor. (If a 
health worker is going to prescribe a medicine, and you think that you might 
be pregnant, tell her so.) You can take acetaminophen, or antacids once in a 
while if you need them. Vitamin and iron pills are often helpful and do no harm 
when taken in the right dosage. Get tested for HIV. Medicines that fight HIV 
can prevent the spread of HIV to the developing baby (see p. 398).
♦ 	 Do not smoke or drink during pregnancy. Smoking and drinking are bad for 
the mother and harm the developing baby.
♦ 	 Stay far away from children with measles, especially German measles (see 
Rubella, p. 312).
♦ 	 Try to rest more, but also get some exercise.
♦ 	 Avoid poisons and chemicals. They can harm the developing baby. Do not 
work near pesticides, herbicides, or factory chemicals—and do not store food 
in their containers. Try not to breathe fumes or powders from chemicals.
This is the normal position of the baby 
in the mother at 9 months.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
248
Minor Problems during Pregnancy
1. Nausea or vomiting: Normally, this is worse in the morning, during the second 
or third month of pregnancy. It helps to eat something dry, like crackers or dry bread, 
before you go to bed at night and before you get out of bed in the morning. Do not 
eat large meals but rather smaller amounts of food several times a day. Avoid greasy 
foods. Tea made from mint leaves also helps. In severe cases, take an antihistamine 
(see p. 385) when you go to bed and when you get up in the morning.
2. Burning or pain in the pit of the stomach or chest (acid indigestion and 
heartburn, see p. 128): Eat only small amounts of food at one time and drink water 
often. Antacids can help, especially those with calcium carbonate (see p. 381). It may 
also help to suck hard candy. Try to sleep with the chest and head lifted up some with 
pillows or blankets.
3. Swelling of the feet: Rest at different times during the day with your feet up (see 
p. 176). Eat less salt and avoid salty foods. Tea made from maize silk (corn silk) may 
help (see p. 12). If the feet are very swollen, and the hands and face also swell, seek 
medical advice. Swelling of the feet usually comes from the pressure of the child in the 
womb during the last months. It is worse in women who are anemic or malnourished. So 
eat plenty of nutritious food.
4. Low back pain: This is common in pregnancy. It can be helped by exercise and 
taking care to stand and sit with the back straight (p. 174).
5. Anemia and malnutrition: Many women in rural areas are anemic even before 
they are pregnant, and become more anemic during pregnancy. To make a healthy 
baby, a woman needs to eat well. If she is very pale and weak or has other signs of 
anemia and malnutrition (see p. 107 and 124), she needs to eat more protein and food 
with iron. Beans, groundnuts, chicken, milk, cheese, eggs, meat, fish, and dark green 
leafy vegetables are good choices. She should also take iron pills (p. 392), especially 
if it is hard to get enough nutritious foods. This way she will strengthen her blood to 
resist dangerous bleeding after childbirth. If possible, iron pills should also contain 
some folic acid and vitamin C. (Vitamin C helps the body make better use of the iron.)
6. Swollen veins (varicose veins): These are common in 
pregnancy, due to the weight of the baby pressing on the veins 
that come from the legs. Put your feet up often, as high as you 
can (see p. 175). If the veins get very big or hurt, wrap them like 
this with an elastic bandage, or use elastic stockings. Take off the 
bandage or stockings at night.
7. Piles (hemorrhoids): These are 
varicose veins in the anus. They result from 
the weight of the baby in the womb.
To relieve the pain, kneel with the 
buttocks in the air like this: 
Or sit in a warm bath. Also see p. 175.
8. Constipation: Drink plenty of water. Eat fruits and food with a lot of natural fiber, 
like cassava or bran. Get plenty of exercise. Do not take strong laxatives.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
249
Danger Signs in Pregnancy
1. Bleeding: If a woman begins to bleed during pregnancy, even a little, this is 
a danger sign. She could be having a miscarriage (losing the baby, p. 281) or the 
baby could be developing outside the womb (ectopic pregnancy, see p. 280). The 
woman should lie quietly and send for a health worker.
Bleeding late in pregnancy (after 6 months) may mean the placenta (afterbirth) is 
blocking the birth opening (placenta previa). Without expert help, the woman could 
quickly bleed to death. Do not do a vaginal exam or put anything inside her vagina. 
Try to get her to a hospital at once.
2. Severe anemia: The woman is weak, tired, and has pale or transparent skin 
(see The Signs of Anemia, p. 124). If not treated, she might die from blood loss at 
childbirth. If anemia is severe, a good diet is not enough to correct the condition 
in time. See a health worker and get pills of iron salts (see p. 392). If possible, she 
should have her baby in a hospital, in case extra blood is needed.
3. High blood pressure or other signs of pre-eclampsia: Blood pressure 
of 140/90 or greater can be a sign of a serious problem called pre-eclampsia 
(toxemia). A lot of protein in the urine, sudden weight gain, and swelling are other 
important signs. Pre-eclampsia can lead to seizures (convulsions, fits) and even 
death. 
If a woman has high blood pressure, ask her to lie down and rest more often. Help 
her get plenty of good foods and to eat a lot of protein (p. 110). She should avoid 
salty packaged foods and snacks. Re-check her blood pressure in a few days. 
If you cannot check for high blood pressure or protein in the urine, watch for 
these other signs of pre-eclampsia:
• 	 Swollen face, or swelling all over in the morning upon awakening
• 	 Headaches
• 	 Dizziness
• 	 Blurred vision
• 	 Pain high in the belly
If her blood pressure keeps going up (to 160/110 or higher) or if she shows  
any of these signs — get medical help fast! If she is already having seizures, 
see p. 178. 
HIV and Pregnancy
If the mother has HIV, HIV can spread to her baby while it is still in her womb or 
during birth. Medicines can help prevent the baby from getting HIV. Talk to a health 
worker who has experience working with people who have HIV, and see p. 398 for 
more information. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
250
CHECK-UPS DURING PREGNANCY (PRENATAL CARE)
Many health centers and midwives encourage pregnant women to come for regular 
prenatal (before birth) check ups and to talk about their health needs. If you are 
pregnant and have the chance to go for these check–ups, you will learn many things to 
help you prevent problems and have a healthier baby.
If you are a midwife, you can provide an important service to mothers-to-be 
(and babies-to-be) by inviting them to come for prenatal check-ups—or by going 
to see them. It is a good idea to see them once a month for the first 6 months of 
pregnancy, twice a month during months 7 and 8, and once a week during the last 
month.
Here are some important things prenatal care should cover:
1. Sharing information
Ask the mother about her problems and needs. Find out how many pregnancies 
she has had, when she had her last baby, and any problems she may have had during 
pregnancy or childbirth. Talk with her about ways she can help herself and her baby be 
healthy, including:
♦  Eating right. Encourage her to eat enough energy foods, and also foods rich in 
protein, vitamins, iron, and calcium (see Chapter 11).
♦  Good hygiene (Chapter 12 and p. 242).
♦  The importance of taking few or no medicines (p. 54)
♦  The importance of not smoking (p. 149), not drinking alcoholic drinks (p. 148), 
and not using drugs (p. 416 and 417).
♦  Getting enough exercise and rest.
♦  Tetanus vaccination to prevent tetanus in the newborn. (Give at the 6th, 7th, and 
8th month if first time. If she has been vaccinated against tetanus before, give 
one booster during the 7th month.)
2. Nutrition
Does the mother look well nourished? Is she anemic? If so, discuss ways of eating 
better. If possible, see that she gets iron pills preferably with folic acid and vitamin C. 
Advise her about how to handle morning sickness (p. 248) and heartburn (p. 128).
Is she gaining weight normally? If possible, weigh her each visit. Normally she 
should gain 8 to 10 kilograms during the nine months of pregnancy. If she stops 
gaining weight, this is a bad sign. Sudden weight gain in the last months is a sign of 
pre-eclampsia. If you do not 
have scales, try to judge 
if she is gaining weight by 
how she looks.
Or make a simple scale:
bricks or other 
objects of known 
weight
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
251
Each month write down how many finger widths the 
womb is above or below the navel. If the womb seems 
too big or grows too fast, it may mean the woman is 
having twins. Or the womb may have more water in it 
than normal. If so, you may find it more difficult to feel 
the baby inside. Too much water in the womb means 
greater risk of severe bleeding during childbirth and 
may mean the baby is deformed.
Try to feel the baby’s position in the womb. If it 
appears to be lying sideways, the mother should go to a 
doctor before labor begins, because an operation may 
be needed. For checking the baby’s position near the 
time of birth, see page 257.
3. Minor problems
Ask the mother if she has any of the common problems of pregnancy. Explain 
that they are not serious, and give what advice you can (see p. 248).
4. Signs of danger and special risk
Check for each of the danger signs on p. 249. Take the mother’s pulse each 
visit. This will let you know what is normal for her in case she has problems later 
(for example, shock from pre-eclampsia or severe bleeding). If you have a blood 
pressure cuff, take her blood pressure (see p. 410). And weigh her. Watch out 
especially for the following danger signs:
• high blood pressure (140/90 or greater)
• protein in the urine
• sudden weight gain
• swelling of hands and face
• headaches
• dizziness and blurred vision
• pain high in the belly
Some midwives may have paper ‘dip sticks’ or other methods for measuring the 
protein and sugar in the urine. High protein may be a sign of pre-eclampsia. High 
sugar could be a sign of diabetes (p. 127).
If any of the danger signs appear, see that the woman gets medical help as soon 
as possible. Also, check for signs of special risk, page 256. If any are present, it is 
safer if the mother gives birth in a hospital.
5. Growth and position of the baby in the womb
Feel the mother’s womb each time she visits; or show her how to do it herself.
signs of pre-eclampsia 
(p. 249)
Normally the womb will be 
2 fingers higher each month.
At 4 ½ months it is usually 
at the level of the navel.
9 months
8 months
7 months
6 months
5 months
4 months
3 months
}
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
252
6. Baby’s heartbeat (fetal heartbeat) and movement
After 5 months, listen for the baby’s heartbeat and check for 
movement. You can try putting your ear against the belly, but it 
may be hard to hear. It will be easier if you get a fetoscope. 
(Or make one. Fired clay or hard wood works well.)
Fetoscope
If the baby’s heartbeat is heard loudest 
below the navel in the last month, the 
baby’s head is down and will probably 
be born head first.
If the heartbeat is heard loudest above 
the navel, his head is probably up.  
It may be a breech birth.
HOW A MOTHER CAN TELL THE DATE 
WHEN SHE IS LIKELY TO GIVE BIRTH:
Start with the date the last menstrual period began, subtract 3 months, and 
add 7 days. For example, suppose your last period began May 10.
May 10 minus 3 months is February 10, 
plus 7 days is February 17.
The baby is likely to be born around February 17.
A baby’s heart beats about twice as fast as an adult’s. If you have a watch with 
a second hand, count the baby’s heartbeats. From 120 to 160 per minute is normal. 
If less than 120, something is wrong. (Or perhaps you counted wrong or heard the 
mother’s heartbeat. Check her pulse. The baby’s heartbeat is often hard to hear. It takes 
practice.)
7. Preparing the mother for labor
As the birth approaches, see the mother more often. If she has other children, ask 
her how long labor lasted and if she had any problems. Perhaps suggest that she lie 
down to rest after eating, twice a day for an hour each time. Talk with her about ways to 
make the birth easier and less painful (see the next pages). You may want to have her 
practice deep, slow breathing, so that she can do this during the contractions of labor. 
Explain to her that relaxing during contractions, and resting between them, will help her 
save strength, reduce pain, and speed labor.
If there is any reason to suspect the labor may result in problems you cannot 
handle, send the mother to a health center or hospital to have her baby. Be sure 
she is near the hospital by the time labor begins.
8. Keeping records
To compare your findings from month to month and see how the mother is 
progressing, it helps to keep simple records. On the next page is a sample record 
sheet. Change it as you see fit. A larger sheet of paper would be better. Each mother 
can keep her own record sheet and bring it when she comes for her check-up. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
253
MONTH
DATE 
OF 
VISIT
WHAT
OFTEN
HAPPENS
GENERAL HEALTH 
AND
MINOR PROBLEMS
ANEMIA 
(how 
severe?)
DANGER SIGNS 
(see p. 249)
SWELLING 
(where?  
how much?)
PULSE
TEMP.
WEIGHT 
(estimate 
or 
measure)
BLOOD 
PRESSURE 
*
PROTEIN 
IN 
URINE  *
SUGAR 
IN 
URINE *
POSITION
OF BABY
IN WOMB
SIZE OF WOMB
(how many fingers
above (+) or below
(– ) the navel?)
1
tiredness,
nausea, and
morning
sickness
womb at level
of the navel
baby’s heartbeat
& 1st movements
some swelling
of feet
constipation
heartburn
varicose veins
shortness
of breath
frequent
urination
baby moves
lower in belly
– 
2
– 
3
– 
4
0
5
+
TETANUS 
VACCINE
6
+
1st
7
(1st week)
+
2nd or 
booster
(3rd week)
+
8
(1st week)
+
3rd
(3rd week)
+
9
(1st week)
+
(2nd week)
+
(3rd week)
+
(4th week)
+
+
BIRTH
}
}
RECORD OF PRENATAL CARE
NAME	
	
	
AGE	
	
NUMBER OF CHILDREN	
	
AGES	
	
DATE OF LAST CHILDBIRTH
DATE OF LAST MENSTRUAL PERIOD	
	
PROBABLE DATE FOR BIRTH		
	
PROBLEMS WITH OTHER BIRTHS
* These are included for midwives who have means of measuring or testing for this information.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
254
THINGS A MOTHER SHOULD HAVE READY 
BEFORE GIVING BIRTH
Every pregnant woman should have the following things ready by the seventh 
month of pregnancy:
A lot of very clean cloths or rags.
A new razor blade. (Do not unwrap 
until you are ready to cut the 
umbilical cord.)
(If you do not have a new razor blade, 
have clean, rust-free scissors ready. 
Boil them just before cutting the cord.)
A clean scrub brush for cleaning the 
hands and fingernails.
Alcohol for rubbing 
hands after washing 
them.
Clean cotton.
Both patches and 
ribbons should 
be wrapped and 
sealed in paper 
packets and then 
baked in an oven 
or ironed.
Two ribbons or strips of clean cloth 
for tying the cord.
An antiseptic soap (or any soap).
Two bowls—1 for washing hands, 1 for 
catching and examining the afterbirth.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
255
Additional Supplies
for the Well-Prepared Midwife or Birth Attendant
Flashlight (torch).
Fetoscope—or fetal 
stethoscope—for listening 
to the baby’s heartbeat 
through the mother’s belly.
Suction bulb for sucking 
mucus out of the baby’s 
nose and mouth.
Blunt-tipped scissors for cutting the 
cord before the baby is all the way 
born (extreme emergency only).
Two clamps (hemostats) for 
clamping the umbilical cord or 
clamping bleeding veins from 
tears of birth opening.
Rubber or plastic gloves (that 
can be sterilized by boiling, see 
p. 74) to wear while examining 
the woman, while the baby 
is coming out, when sewing 
tears in the birth opening, and 
for catching and examining 
afterbirth.
Sterile needle and gut thread for 
sewing tears in the birth opening.
Tetracycline or 
erythromycin eye 
ointment for the baby’s 
eyes to prevent dangerous 
infection (see p. 221).
Several injections of ergonovine, 
oxytocin, or tablets of misoprostol 
(see p. 390 and 391).
Sterile syringe and needles.
HIV medicines for mother and 
baby if mother or father has HIV 
(see p. 398). 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
256
PREPARING FOR BIRTH
Birth is a natural event. When the mother is healthy and everything goes well, 
the baby can be born without help from anyone. In a normal birth, the less the 
midwife or birth attendant does, the more likely everything will go well.
Difficulties in childbirth do occur, and sometimes the life of the mother or child 
may be in danger. If there is any reason to think that a birth may be difficult or 
dangerous, a skilled midwife or experienced doctor should be present.
CAUTION: If you have a fever, cough, sore throat, or sores or infections on your 
skin at the time of the birth, it would be better for someone else to deliver the baby.
Signs of Special Risk that Make it Important that a Doctor or 
Skilled Midwife Attend the Birth—if Possible in a Hospital:
•	 If regular labor pains begin more than 3 weeks before the baby  
is expected.
•	 If the woman begins to bleed before labor.
•	 If there are signs of pre-eclampsia (see p. 249).
•	 If the woman is suffering from a chronic or acute illness.
•	 If the woman is very anemic or if her blood does not clot normally  
(when she cuts herself).
•	 If she is under 15, over 40, or over 35 at her first pregnancy.
•	 If she has had more than 5 or 6 babies.
•	 If she is especially short or has narrow hips (p. 267).
•	 If she has had serious trouble or severe bleeding with other births.
•	 If she has diabetes or heart trouble.
•	 If she has a hernia.
•	 If it looks like she will have twins (see p. 269).
•	 If it seems the baby is not in a good position (head down) in the womb.
•	 If the bag of waters breaks and labor does not begin within a few hours. 
(The danger is even greater if there is fever.)
•	 If the baby is still not born 2 weeks after 9 months of pregnancy.
THE BIRTHS WITH THE GREATEST CHANCE OF PROBLEMS ARE:
the first birth
and
the last births after having many 
children
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
257
Checking if the Baby Is in a Good Position
To make sure the baby is head down, in the normal position for birth, feel for his 
head, like this:
1. Have the mother breathe out all the way.
With the thumb and 2 fingers, push in 
here, just above the pelvic bone.
With the other hand, feel the top of the 
womb.
Butt up 
feels larger 
high up.
The baby’s butt is 
larger and wider.
His head is hard 
and round.
Butt down 
feels larger 
low down.
If the baby’s butt 
is pushed gently 
sideways, the 
baby’s whole body 
will move too.
But if the head 
is pushed gently 
sideways, it will 
bend at the neck 
and the back 
will not move.
If the baby still is high in 
the womb, you can move 
the head a little. But if 
it has already engaged 
(dropped lower) getting 
ready for birth, you 
cannot move it.
A woman’s first baby 
sometimes engages 2 weeks 
before labor begins. Later 
babies may not engage until 
labor starts.
If the baby’s head is down, his birth is likely to go well. 
If the head is up, the birth may be more difficult (a breech birth), and 
it is safer for the mother give birth in or near a hospital. 
If the baby is sideways, the mother should have her baby in a 
hospital. She and the baby are in danger (see p. 267).
2. Push gently from side to side, first with one hand, then the other.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
258
SIGNS THAT SHOW LABOR IS NEAR
•	 A few days before labor begins, usually the baby moves lower in the womb. 
This lets the mother breathe more easily, but she may need to urinate more often 
because of pressure on the bladder. (In the first birth these signs can appear up to 
4 weeks before delivery.)
•	 A short time before the labor begins, some thick mucus (jelly) may come out.
Or some mucus may come out for 2 or 3 days before labor begins. Sometimes it is 
tinted with blood. This is normal.
•	 The contractions (sudden tightening of the womb) or labor pains may start 
up to several days before childbirth at first a long time usually passes between 
contractions—several minutes or even hours. When the contractions become 
stronger, regular, and more frequent, labor is beginning.
•	 Some women have a few practice contractions weeks before labor. This is 
normal. On rare occasions, a woman may have false labor. This happens when the 
contractions are coming strong and close together, but then stop for hours or days 
before childbirth actually begins. Sometimes walking, a warm bath, or resting will 
help calm the contractions if they are false, or bring on childbirth if they are real. 
Even if it is false labor, the contractions help to prepare the womb for labor.
Labor pains are caused by contractions or tightening of the womb. 
Between contractions the womb is relaxed like this:
During contractions, the womb tightens and lifts up like this:
The contractions push the baby down farther. This causes the cervix or 
‘door of the womb’ to open—a little more each time.
•	 The bag of water that holds the baby in the womb usually breaks with a flood of liquid 
sometime after labor has begun. If the waters break before the contractions start, this 
usually means the beginning of labor. After the waters break, the mother should keep 
very clean. Walking back and forth may help bring on labor more quickly. To prevent 
infection, avoid sexual intercourse, do not sit in a bath of water, and do not douche or 
put anything in the vagina. If labor does not start within 12 hours, seek medical help. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
259
THE STAGES OF LABOR
Labor has 3 parts or stages:
•	 The first stage lasts from the beginning of the strong contractions until the 
womb opens and the baby starts to move through the birth canal.
•	 The second stage lasts from when the baby enters the birth canal until it is born.
•	 The third stage lasts from the birth of the baby until the placenta (afterbirth) 
comes out.
THE FIRST STAGE OF LABOR usually lasts 10 to 20 hours or more when it is the 
mother’s first birth, and from 7 to 10 hours in later births. This varies a lot.
During the first stage of labor, the mother should not try to hurry the birth. It is 
natural for this stage to go slowly. The mother may not feel the progress and begin to 
worry. Try to reassure her. Tell her that most women have the same concern.
The mother should not try to push or bear down until the child is beginning to 
move down into the birth canal, and she feels she has to push.
The mother should keep her bowels and bladder empty.
Bladder full 
of urine
Feces 
(stools)
If the bladder and the 
bowels are full, they get in 
the way when the baby is 
being born.
During labor, the mother should urinate often. If she has not moved her bowels 
in several hours, an enema may make labor easier. During labor the mother should 
drink water or other liquids often. Too little liquid in the body can slow down or stop 
labor. If labor is long, she should eat lightly, as well. If she is vomiting, she should 
sip a little Rehydration Drink, herbal tea, or fruit juices between each contraction.
During labor the mother should change positions often or get up and walk 
about from time to time. She should not lie flat on her back for a long time.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
260
During the first stage of labor, the midwife or birth attendant should:
♦	 Wash the mother’s belly, genitals, buttocks, and legs well with soap and warm 
water. The bed should be in a clean place with enough light to see clearly.
♦	 Spread clean sheets, towels, or newspapers on the bed and change them 
whenever they get wet or dirty.
♦	 Have a new, unopened razor blade ready for cutting the cord, or boil a pair of 
scissors for 15 minutes. Keep the scissors in the boiled water in a covered pan 
until they are needed.
The midwife should not massage or push on the belly. She should not ask the 
mother to push or bear down at this time.
If the mother is frightened or in great pain, have her take deep, slow, regular breaths 
during each contraction, and breathe normally between them. This will help control the 
pain and calm her. Reassure the mother that the strong pains are normal and that they 
help to push her baby out.
THE SECOND STAGE OF LABOR, in which the child is born: Sometimes this begins 
when the bag of water breaks. It is often easier than the first stage and usually does not 
take longer than 2 hours. During the contractions the mother bears down (pushes) with 
all her strength. Between contractions, she may seem very tired and half asleep. This is 
normal.
To bear down, the mother should take a deep breath and push hard with her 
stomach muscles, as if she were having a bowel movement. If the child comes slowly 
after the bag of waters breaks, the mother can double her knees like this, while
squatting,
sitting propped up,
or lying down.
kneeling,
When the birth opening of the mother stretches, and the baby’s head begins to 
show, the midwife or helper should have everything ready for the birth of the baby. 
At this time the mother should try not to push hard, so that the head comes out more 
slowly. This helps prevent tearing of the opening (see p. 269 for more details).
In a normal birth, the midwife NEVER needs to put her hand or finger inside the 
mother. This is the most common cause of dangerous infections of the mother after the 
birth.
When the head comes out, the midwife may support it, but must never pull on it.
If possible, wear gloves to attend the birth—to protect the health of the mother, 
baby, and midwife. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
261
All the force must come from the mother. The midwife should never pull on the 
head, or twist or bend the baby’s neck, because this can harm the baby.
Normally the baby is born head first like this:
Now push hard.
Now try not to push hard. Take 
many short, fast breaths. This 
helps prevent tearing the opening 
(see p. 269).
Then the baby’s body turns to 
one side so the shoulders can 
come out.
The head usually comes out face 
down. If the baby has feces (shit) 
in her mouth and nose, clean it out 
immediately (see p. 262).
If the shoulders get stuck after the head comes out:
The midwife can take the baby’s 
head in her hands and lower it 
very carefully, so the shoulder 
can come out.
Then she can raise the head a 
little so that the other shoulder 
comes out.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
262
THE THIRD STAGE OF LABOR begins when the baby has been born and lasts until the 
placenta (afterbirth) comes out. Usually, the placenta comes out by itself 5 minutes to 
an hour after the baby. In the meantime, care for the baby. If there is a lot of bleeding 
(see p. 265) or if the placenta does not come out within 1 hour, seek medical help.
CARE OF THE BABY AT BIRTH
Immediately after the baby comes out:
♦	 Put the baby’s head down so that the mucus 
comes out of his mouth and throat. Keep it 
this way until he begins to breathe.
♦	 Keep the baby below the level of the mother 
until the cord is tied. (This way, the baby gets 
more blood and will be stronger.)
♦	 Dry the baby and if he does not begin to breathe 
right away, rub his back with a towel or a cloth.
♦	 If he still does not breathe, clean the mucus out of his nose and 
mouth with a clean cloth wrapped around your finger.
♦	 If the baby has not begun to breathe within one minute after birth, 
start MOUTH-TO-MOUTH BREATHING at once (see p. 80).
♦	 Wrap the baby in a clean cloth. It is very important not to let him get cold, 
especially if he is premature (born too early).
How to Cut the Cord
When the child is born, the cord pulses and is fat and blue. WAIT.
After a while, the cord becomes thin and white. It stops pulsing. Now tie it in 
2 places with very clean, dry strips of cloth, string, or ribbon. These should have been 
recently ironed or heated in an oven. Cut between the ties, like this:
IMPORTANT: Cut the cord with a clean, unused razor blade. Before unwrapping it, 
wash your hands very well. Or wear clean rubber or plastic gloves. If you do not have a 
new razor blade, use freshly boiled scissors.
Always cut the cord close to the body of the newborn baby. Leave only about 
2 centimeters attached to the baby. These precautions help prevent tetanus (see p. 182).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
263
Care of the Cut Cord
Keep the cord stump clean and 
dry. Always wash your hands before 
touching the cord stump.
If the cord becomes dirty or 
has a lot of dried blood on it, clean 
it gently with medical alcohol or 
strong drinking alcohol, or with 
gentian violet. Do not put anything 
else on the cord—dirt and dung 
are especially dangerous. They can 
cause tetanus and kill the baby,  
see pages 182 to 184.
If the baby is wearing diapers, 
keep the diaper folded below  
the cord.
If the cord or the area around the 
cord gets red, drains pus, or smells bad,  
see page 272.
The cord stump usually falls off 5 to 7 days after birth. There may be a few  
drops of blood or smooth mucus when the cord falls off. This is normal. But if there is 
a lot of blood or any pus, get medical help.
Cleaning the Newborn Baby
With a warm, soft, damp cloth, gently clean away any blood or fluid.
It is better not to bathe the baby until after the cord drops off. Then bathe him 
daily in warm water, using a mild soap.
Put the Newborn Baby to the Breast at Once
Place the baby at its mother’s breast as soon as the baby is born. If the baby 
breastfeeds, this will help to make the afterbirth come out sooner and to prevent or 
control heavy bleeding.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
264
THE DELIVERY OF THE PLACENTA (AFTERBIRTH)
Normally, the placenta comes out 5 minutes to an hour after the baby is born, but 
sometimes it is delayed for many hours (see below).
Checking the afterbirth:
When the afterbirth comes out, 
pick it up and examine it to see if it is 
complete. If it is torn and there seem 
to be pieces missing, get medical 
help. A piece of placenta left inside 
the womb can cause continued 
bleeding or infection.
When the placenta is delayed in coming:
If the mother is not losing much blood, do nothing. Do not pull on the cord. This 
could cause dangerous hemorrhage (heavy bleeding). Sometimes the placenta will 
come out if the woman squats and pushes a little.
If the mother is losing blood, feel the womb (uterus) through the belly. If it is soft,  
do the following:
Use gloves or plastic bags on your hands to handle 
the placenta. Wash your hands well afterwards.
Massage the womb carefully, until 
it gets hard. This should make it 
contract and push out the placenta.
If the placenta does not come out soon, and bleeding 
continues, push downward on the top of the womb very 
carefully, while supporting the bottom of the womb like this.
If the placenta still does not come out, and the heavy bleeding continues, try to 
control the bleeding (see next page) and seek medical help fast.
HEMORRHAGING (HEAVY BLEEDING)
When the placenta comes out, there is always a brief flow of blood. It normally lasts 
only a few minutes and not more than a quarter of a liter (1 cup) of blood is lost. (A little 
bleeding may continue for several days and is usually not serious.)
WARNING: Sometimes a woman may be bleeding severely inside without much blood 
coming out. Feel her belly from time to time. If it seems to be getting bigger, it may be 
filling with blood. Check her pulse often and watch for signs of shock (p. 77).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
265
♦ If the bleeding continues in spite of massaging the womb, do the following:
Using all of your weight, press down with both 
hands, one over the other, on the belly just 
below the navel. You should continue pressing 
down a long time after the bleeding stops.
♦	 If the bleeding is still not under control:
Press both hands into the belly above the 
womb. Scoop it up and fold it forward so the 
womb is pressed hard against the pubic bone. 
Press as hard as you can, using your weight 
if your muscles are not strong enough. Keep 
pressing for several minutes after the bleeding 
has stopped, or until you can get medical help.
Note: Although some doctors use it, vitamin K does not help stop bleeding related to 
childbirth, miscarriage, or abortion. Vitamin K is only helpful for babies. Do not give 
to adults.
To help prevent or control heavy bleeding, let the baby suck the mother’s 
breast. If the baby will not suck, have someone else suck or gently pull and 
massage the mother’s nipples. This will cause her to produce a hormone (pituitrin) 
that helps control bleeding.
If heavy bleeding continues, or if the mother is losing a great deal of blood 
through a slow trickle, do the following:
♦	 Get medical help fast. If the bleeding does not stop quickly, the mother may 
need to be given serum blood in a vein (a transfusion).
♦	 If you have ergonovine, oxytocin, or misoprostol, use it, following the 
instructions on the next page. (Use oxytocin or misoprostol instead of 
ergonovine if the placenta is still inside.)
♦	 The mother should drink a lot of liquid (water, fruit juices, tea, soup, or 
Rehydration Drink—p. 152). If she grows faint or has a fast, weak pulse or 
shows other signs of shock, put her legs up and her head down (see p. 77).
♦	 If the mother is losing a lot of blood, and is in danger of bleeding to death, try 
to stop the bleeding like this:
If the bleeding stops, check every 
5 minutes to make sure the womb stays 
hard. If it does not, massage it again.
Massage the belly until you 
can feel the womb get hard.
As soon as the womb gets hard and bleeding stops. stop massaging. 
Check it every minute or so. If it gets soft, massage it again.
womb
bone
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
266
Medicines to control bleeding after birth or 
miscarriage: Ergonovine, Oxytocin, Misoprostol
Ergonovine, ergometrine, oxytocin, and misoprostol are all medicines that cause 
contractions of the uterus and its blood vessels. They are important but dangerous 
drugs. Used the wrong way, they can cause the death of the mother or the child in her 
womb. Used correctly, they can save lives. These are their lifesaving uses:
1. To control bleeding after childbirth. If there is heavy bleeding before or after 
the placenta has come out, inject 10 units of oxytocin in the muscle (Pitocin, p. 390) 
as soon as possible. If the bleeding does not stop in 15 minutes, inject another 
10 units. If there is no oxytocin, you can use misoprostol (Cytotec, p. 391) instead. 
For heavy bleeding after the placenta comes out, you can give ergonovine or 
ergometrine (Ergotrate, p. 390). But do not use ergonovine or ergometrine before the 
placenta is out.
IMPORTANT: Midwives and other health workers who help women deliver should carry 
enough medicines to stop heavy bleeding if it happens. Too many mothers bleed to 
death who could be saved. 
2. To help prevent heavy bleeding after birth. Some authorities now recommend 
giving all women a single dose of oxytocin, ergonovine, or misoprostol as described 
above to prevent heavy bleeding after birth. This will prevent some dangerous 
bleeding, but also treats many women with medicine when they do not need it. A 
midwife who only has a little medicine may choose to save the medicine she has  
for emergencies. 
3. To control the bleeding of a miscarriage (p. 281). If the woman is rapidly 
losing blood and medical help is far away, use oyxtocin, misoprostol, or ergonovine as 
suggested above. 
WARNING: The use of ergonovine, oxytocin or misoprostol to hasten childbirth or give 
strength to the mother in labor is very dangerous for both her and the child. These 
medicines are rarely needed before the baby is born, and then only a highly trained 
birth attendant should use them. 
THE USE OF MEDICINES 
TO ‘GIVE STRENGTH’ TO 
THE MOTHER DURING 
CHILDBIRTH . . .
CAN KILL THE 
MOTHER, THE 
BABY, OR BOTH.
There is no safe medicine to give strength to the mother or to make the birth quicker 
or easier.
If you want the woman to have enough strength for childbirth, have her eat plenty 
of nutritious foods, especially during the 9 months of pregnancy (see p. 107). Also 
encourage her to space a few years between her pregnancies so her body can regain 
its full strength (see Family Planning, p. 283).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
267
DIFFICULT BIRTHS
It is important to get medical help as quickly as possible when there is any 
serious problem during labor. Many problems or complications may come up, some 
more serious than others. Here are a few of the more common ones:
1. LABOR STOPS OR SLOWS DOWN, or lasts a very long time after being 
strong or after the waters break. This has several possible causes:
•	 The woman may be frightened or upset. This can slow down or even stop 
contractions. Talk to her. Help her to relax. Try to reassure her. Explain that the 
birth is slow, but there are no serious problems. Encourage her to change her 
position often and to drink, eat, and urinate. Stimulation (massage or milking 
motion) of the nipples can help speed labor.
•	 The baby may be in an unusual position. 
Feel the belly between contractions to see 
if the baby is sideways. Sometimes the 
midwife can turn the baby through gentle 
handling of the woman’s belly. Try to work 
the baby around little by little between 
contractions, until the head is down. But do 
not use force as this could tear the womb 
or placenta, or pinch the cord. If the baby 
cannot be turned, try to get the mother to 
the hospital.
•	 The baby’s head may be too large to fit through the woman’s hip bones 
(pelvis). This is more likely in a woman with very narrow hips or a young 
woman or girl whose body is not fully grown. (It is very unlikely in a woman 
who has given normal birth before.) You may feel that the baby does not 
move down. If you suspect this problem, try to get the mother to a hospital as 
she may need an operation (Cesarean). Women who are of short stature 
(dwarfs), have very narrow hips or are especially young should have at 
least their first child in or near a hospital.
•	 If the mother has been vomiting or has not been drinking liquids, she 
may be dehydrated. This can slow down or stop contractions. Have her sip 
Rehydration Drink or other liquids after each contraction.
•	 If the baby is facing forward rather than 
backward, you may feel the lumpy arms and 
legs rather than the rounded back. This is 
usually no big problem, but labor may be 
longer and cause the woman more back pain. 
She should change positions often, as this 
may help turn the baby. Have her try on her 
hands and knees.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
268
2. BREECH DELIVERY (the buttocks come 
out first). Sometimes the midwife can tell if 
the baby is in the breech position by feeling 
the mother’s belly (p. 257) and listening to the 
baby’s heartbeat (p. 252).
A breech birth may be easier in this position:
If the baby’s legs come out, but not the arms, wash your hands very well, rub them 
with alcohol (or wear sterile gloves), and then. . .
slip your fingers inside and push the baby’s 
shoulders toward the back, like this:
or press his arms against his 
body, like this:
If the baby gets stuck, have the mother 
lie face up. Put your finger in the baby’s 
mouth and push his head towards his 
chest. At the same time have someone 
push the baby’s head down by pressing 
on the mother’s belly like this:
Have the mother push hard. But  
never pull on the body of the baby.
3. PRESENTATION OF AN ARM (hand 
first). If the baby’s hand comes out first, get 
medical help right away. An operation may 
be needed to get the baby out.
4. Sometimes the CORD IS WRAPPED 
AROUND THE BABY’S NECK so tightly he 
cannot come out all the way. Try to slip the loop 
of cord from around the baby’s neck. If you cannot do this, you may have to clamp or 
tie and cut the cord. Use boiled blunt tipped scissors.
5. FECES IN THE BABY’S MOUTH AND NOSE. When the waters break, if you see 
they contain a dark green (almost black) liquid, this is probably the baby’s first stools 
(meconium). The baby may be in danger. If he breathes any of the feces into his lungs, 
he may die. As soon as his head is out, tell the mother not to push, but to take short, 
rapid breaths. Before the baby starts breathing, take time to suck the feces out of 
his nose and mouth with a suction bulb. Even if he starts breathing right away, keep 
sucking until you get all the feces out.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
269
6. TWINS. Giving birth to twins is often more difficult and 
dangerous—both for the mother and babies—than giving 
birth to a single baby.
To be safe, the mother should give 
birth to twins in a hospital.
The mother should try to 
stop pushing when the 
baby’s head is coming out. 
This gives her birth opening 
time to stretch. In order not 
to push, she should pant 
(take many rapid breaths).
When the birth opening is 
stretching, the midwife can 
support it with one hand 
and with the other hand 
gently keep the head from 
coming too fast, like this:
It may also help to put 
warm compresses 
against the skin below the 
birth opening. Start when 
it begins to stretch. You 
can also massage the 
stretched skin with oil.
Because with twins labor often begins early, the mother 
should be within easy reach of a hospital after the 
seventh month of pregnancy.
Signs that a woman is likely to have twins:
•	 The belly grows faster and the womb is larger than usual, especially in the last 
months (see p. 251)
•	 If the woman gains weight faster than normal, or the common problems of 
pregnancy (morning sickness, backache, varicose veins, piles, swelling, and 
difficult breathing) are worse than usual, be sure to check for twins.
•	 If you can feel 3 or more large objects (heads and buttocks) in a womb that 
seems extra large, twins are likely.
•	 Sometimes you can hear 2 different heartbeats (other than the mother’s)—but 
this is difficult.
During the last months, if the woman rests a lot and is careful to avoid hard work, 
twins are less likely to be born too early.
Twins are often born small and need special care. However, there is no truth in 
beliefs that twins have strange or magic powers.
TEARING OF THE BIRTH OPENING
The birth opening must stretch a lot for the baby to come out. Sometimes it tears. 
Tearing is more likely if it is the mother’s first baby.
Tearing can usually be prevented if care is taken:
If a tear does happen, someone who knows how should carefully sew it shut after 
the placenta comes out (see p. 86 and 381).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
270
CARE OF THE NEWBORN BABY
The Cord
To prevent the freshly cut cord from becoming infected, it should be kept clean 
and dry. The drier it is, the sooner it will fall off and the navel will heal. For this reason, 
it is better not to use a belly band, or if one is used, to keep it very loose (see p. 184 
and 263).
The Eyes
To protect a newborn baby’s eyes from dangerous 
conjunctivitis, put a line of 1% tetracycline or 
erythromycin 0.5% to 1% ointment in each eye within 
the first 2 hours (p. 221 and 378). This is especially 
important if either parent has ever had signs of 
gonorrhea or chlamydia (p. 236).
Keeping the Baby Warm—but Not Too Warm
Protect the baby from cold, but also from too much heat. Dress him as warmly as 
you feel like dressing yourself.
IN COLD WEATHER
WRAP THE BABY WELL.
LEAVE HIM NAKED.
BUT IN HOT WEATHER (OR 
WHEN THE BABY HAS A FEVER)
To keep a baby just warm enough, keep him close to his mother’s body. This is 
especially important for a baby that is born early or very small. See ‘Special Care for 
Small, Early, and Underweight Babies’, p. 405.
Cleanliness
It is important to follow the Guidelines of Cleanliness as discussed in Chapter 12. 
Take special care with the following:
♦	 Change the baby’s diapers (nappy) or bedding each time he wets or dirties them. 
If the skin gets red, change the diaper more often—or better, leave it off!  
(See p. 215.)
♦	 After the cord drops off, bathe the baby daily with mild soap and warm water.
♦	 If there are flies or mosquitos, cover the baby’s crib with mosquito netting or 
a thin cloth.
♦	 Persons with open sores, colds, sore throat, tuberculosis, or other infectious 
illnesses should not touch or go near the newborn baby or the woman while she 
is giving birth.
♦	 Keep the baby in a clean place away from smoke and dust.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
271
Feeding 
(Also see “The Best Diet for Small Children,” p. 120.)
Breast milk is by far the best food for a baby. Babies who nurse on breast milk 
are healthier, grow stronger, and are less likely to die. This is why:
•	 Breast milk has a better balance of what the baby needs than does any other 
milk, whether fresh, canned, or powdered.
•	 Breast milk is clean. When other foods are given, especially by bottle feeding, 
it is very hard to keep things clean enough to prevent the baby from getting 
diarrhea and other sicknesses.
•	 The temperature of breast milk is always right.
•	 Breast milk has things in it (antibodies) that help protect the baby against 
certain illnesses, such as diarrhea, measles, and polio.
The mother should give her breast to the baby as soon as he is born. For the 
first few days the mother’s breasts usually produce very little milk. This is normal. 
She should continue to nurse her baby often—at least every two hours. The baby’s 
sucking will help her produce more milk. If the baby seems healthy, gains weight, 
and wets her diaper (nappy) regularly, the mother is producing enough milk.
It is best for the baby if the mother gives him only breast milk for the first 
6 months. After that, she should continue to breastfeed her baby, but should begin 
to give him other nourishing foods also (see p. 122). Mothers with HIV should 
stop breastfeeding when the baby is 12 months old if they can give enough other 
nutritious foods.
HOW A MOTHER CAN PRODUCE MORE BREAST MILK:
She should...
♦	 drink plenty of liquids,
♦	 eat as well as possible, especially food with a lot of calcium (like milk 
products) and body building foods (see p. 110),
♦	 get plenty of sleep and avoid getting very tired or upset,
♦	 nurse her baby more often—at least every 2 hours.
BREAST-FED BABIES ARE HEALTHIER.
BOTTLE-FED BABIES ARE MORE LIKELY 
TO GET SICK AND DIE.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
272
Care in Giving Medicines to the Newborn
Many medicines are dangerous for the newborn. Use only medicines you 
are sure are recommended for the newborn and use them only when they are 
absolutely necessary. Be sure you know the right dose and do not give too much. 
Chloramphenicol, for example, is dangerous to newborns, especially if the baby is 
premature or underweight (less than 2 kilograms).
Sometimes it is important to give medicines to a newborn. For example, giving 
cotrimoxazole to a baby whose mother has HIV can protect the baby’s health.  
See p. 358.
ILLNESSES OF THE NEWBORN
It is very important to notice any problem or illness a baby may have and to 
act quickly.
Problems the Baby Is Born With (Also see p. 316)
These may result from something that went wrong with the development of the 
baby in the womb or from damage to the baby while he was being born. Examine 
the baby carefully immediately after birth. If he shows any of the following signs, 
something is probably seriously wrong with him:
•	 If he does not breathe as soon as he is born.
•	 If his pulse cannot be felt or heard, or is less than 100 beats per minute.
•	 If his face and body are white, blue, or yellow after he has begun breathing.
•	 If his arms and legs are floppy—he does not move them by himself or when you 
pinch them.
•	 If he grunts or has difficulty breathing after the first 15 minutes.
Some of these problems may be caused by brain damage at birth. They are 
almost never caused by infection (unless the water broke more than 12 hours before 
birth). Common medicines probably will not help. Keep the baby warm, but not too 
warm (see p. 270). Try to get medical help.
If the newborn baby vomits or shits blood, or develops many bruises, she may 
need vitamin K (see p. 392).
If the baby does not urinate or have a bowel movement in the first 2 days, also 
seek medical help.
Problems that Result After the Baby Is Born 
(in the first days or weeks)
1. Pus or a bad smell from the navel (cord) is a dangerous sign. Watch for early 
signs of tetanus (p. 182) or bacterial infection of the blood (p. 275). Soak the cord in 
alcohol and leave it open to the air. If the skin around the cord becomes hot and 
red, treat with ampicillin (p. 352) or with penicillin and streptomycin (p. 353).
Diseases that take days or weeks to kill 
adults can kill a baby in a matter of hours.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
273
2. Either low temperature (below 35° C) or high fever can be a sign of infection. 
High fever (above 39° C) is dangerous for the newborn. Take off all clothing and 
sponge the baby with cool (not cold) water as shown on page 76. Also look for signs 
of dehydration (see p. 151). If you find these signs, give the baby breast milk and 
also Rehydration Drink (p. 152).
3. Seizures (fits, convulsions, see p. 178). If the baby also has fever, treat it as 
just described. Be sure to check for dehydration. Seizures that begin the day of birth 
could be caused by brain damage at birth. If seizures begin several days later, look 
carefully for signs of tetanus (p. 182) or meningitis (p. 185).
4. The baby does not gain weight. During the first days of life, most babies lose 
a little weight. This is normal. After the first week, a healthy baby should gain about 
200 g., a week. By two weeks the healthy baby should weigh as much as he did at 
birth. If he does not gain weight, or loses weight, something is wrong. Did the baby 
seem healthy at birth? Does he feed well? Examine the baby carefully for signs of 
infection or other problems. If you cannot find out the cause of the problem and 
correct it, get medical help.
5. Vomiting. When healthy babies burp (or bring up 
air they have swallowed while feeding), sometimes a little 
milk comes up too. This is normal. Help the baby bring up 
air after feeding by holding him against your shoulder and 
patting his back gently, like this.
If a baby vomits when you lay him down after nursing, 
try sitting him upright for a while after each feeding.
A baby who vomits violently, or so much and so often 
that he begins to lose weight or become dehydrated, is 
ill. If the baby also has diarrhea, he probably has a gut 
infection (p. 157). Bacterial infection of the blood (see the next pages), meningitis 
(p. 185), and other infections may also cause vomiting.
If the vomit is yellow or green, there may be a gut obstruction (p. 94), especially 
if the belly is very swollen or the baby has not been having bowel movements. Take 
the baby to a health center at once.
6. The baby stops sucking well. If more than 4 hours pass and the baby still will 
not nurse, this is a danger sign—especially if the baby seems very sleepy or ill, or if 
he cries or moves differently from normal. Many illnesses can cause these signs, but 
the most common and dangerous causes in the first 2 weeks of life are a bacterial 
infection of the blood (see next 2 pages) and tetanus (p. 182).
BURP YOUR BABY 
AFTER FEEDING.
A baby who stops nursing during the second to fifth day of 
life may have a bacterial infection of the blood.
A baby who stops nursing during the fifth to fifteenth 
day may have tetanus.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
274
IMPORTANT: If a baby has meningitis and dehydration at the same time, the soft spot 
may feel normal. Be sure to check for other signs of both dehydration (see p. 151) 
and meningitis (see p. 185).
•	 Watch the baby’s movements and expression on his face.
Stiffness of the body or strange movements may be 
signs of tetanus, meningitis, or brain damage from birth. 
If, when the baby is touched or moved, the muscles 
of his face and body suddenly tighten, this could be 
tetanus. See if his jaw will open and check his knee 
reflexes (p. 183).
If a Baby Stops Sucking Well or Seems Ill
Examine him carefully and completely as described in Chapter 3. Be sure to check 
the following:
•	 Notice if the baby has difficulty breathing. If the nose is stuffed up, suck it 
out as shown on page 164. Fast breathing (50 or more breaths a minute), blue 
color, grunting, and sucking in of the skin between the ribs with each breath are 
signs of pneumonia (p. 171). Small babies with pneumonia often do not cough; 
sometimes none of the common signs are present. If you suspect pneumonia, 
treat as for a bacterial infection of the blood (see the next page).
•	 Look at the baby’s skin color.
If the lips and face are blue, consider pneumonia (or a heart defect or other 
problem the baby was born with).
If the face and whites of the eyes begin to get yellow (jaundiced) in the 
first day of life or after the fifth day, this is serious. Get medical help. Some 
yellow color between the second and fifth day of life is usually not serious. Give 
plenty of breast milk by spoon if necessary. Take off all the baby’s clothes and put 
him in bright light near a window (but not direct sunlight).
•	 Feel the soft spot on top of the head (fontanel). See p. 9.
If the soft spot 
is SUNKEN, 
the baby may be 
DEHYDRATED.
If the soft spot is 
SWOLLEN, the 
baby  may  have  
MENINGITIS.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
275
If the baby’s eyes roll back or flutter when he makes sudden or violent 
movements, he probably does not have tetanus. Such seizures may be caused 
by meningitis, but dehydration and high fever are more common causes. Can you 
put the baby’s head between his knees? If the baby is too stiff for this or cries out in 
pain, it is probably meningitis (see p. 185).
• Look for signs of a bacterial infection in the blood.
Bacterial Infection in the Blood (Septicemia)
Newborn babies cannot fight infections well. Therefore, bacteria that enter the 
baby’s skin or cord at the time of birth often get into the blood and spread through 
his whole body. Since this takes a day or two, septicemia is most common after the 
second day of life.
Signs:
Signs of infection in newborn babies are different from those in older children. 
In the baby, almost any sign could be caused by a serious infection in the blood. 
Possible signs are:
• does not suck well
• seems very sleepy
• very pale (anemic)
• vomiting or diarrhea
• fever or low temperature (below 35° C)
Each of these signs may be caused by something other than septicemia, but if 
the baby has several of these signs at once, septicemia is likely.
Newborn babies do not always have a fever when they have a serious infection. 
The temperature may be high, low, or normal.
Treatment when you suspect septicemia in the newborn:
♦	 Inject 50 mg. of ampicillin (p. 352) for each kilogram the baby weighs, 2 times 
a day for a baby less than 1 week old or 3 times a day if the baby is older 
than 1 week. If you cannot calculate the dosage, inject the average dose of 
150 mg. of ampicillin. 
♦	 Also inject 5 mg. of gentamicin for each kilogram the baby weighs. Only give 
gentamicin once a day. If you cannot calculate the dosage, inject the average 
dose of 15 mg. of gentamicin for a baby less than 1 week old, or 20 mg. if the 
baby is older than 1 week. 
♦	 Be sure the baby has enough liquids. Spoon feed breast milk and Rehydration 
Drink, if necessary (see p. 152).
♦	 Try to get medical help.
• swollen belly
• yellow skin (jaundice)
• seizures (convulsions)
• times when the baby turns blue
Infections in newborn babies are sometimes hard to recognize. 
Often there is no fever. If possible, get medical help. If not, 
treat with ampicillin and gentamicin as described above. 
Ampicillin is one of the safest and most useful antibiotics  
for babies.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
276
THE MOTHER’S HEALTH AFTER CHILDBIRTH
Diet and Cleanliness
As was explained in Chapter 11, after she gives birth to a baby, the mother can and 
should eat every kind of nutritious food she can get. She does not need to avoid 
any kind of food. Foods that are especially good for her are milk, cheese, chicken, 
eggs, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, grains, beans, groundnuts, etc. If all she has is corn 
and beans, she should eat them both together at each meal. A good diet helps the 
mother make plenty of milk for her baby.
The mother can and should bathe in the first few days after giving birth. In the first 
week, it is better if she bathes with a wet towel and does not go into the water. Bathing 
is not harmful following childbirth. In fact, women who let many days go by without 
bathing may get infections that will make their skin unhealthy and their babies sick.
During the days and weeks following childbirth, the mother should:
Childbirth Fever (Infection after Giving Birth, Womb Infection)
Sometimes a mother develops fever and infection after childbirth, often because 
someone attending the birth did not keep everything very clean or because he or she 
put a hand inside the mother.
The signs of childbirth fever are: Chills or fever, headache or low back pain, 
sometimes pain in the belly, and a foul-smelling or bloody discharge from the vagina.
Treatment:
Give 3 medicines: inject 2 grams of ampicillin for the first dose, and then 1 gram 4 
times a day. Also inject 80 mg. of gentamicin for the first dose, then 60 mg. 3 times a 
day. Also give 500 mg. of metronidazole by mouth 3 times a day. Continue giving these 
medicines until after the fever has been gone for 2 days.
Childbirth fever can be very dangerous. If the mother does not start to feel 
better the next day, get medical help. 
eat nutritious foods
and
bathe regularly.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
277
BreastfeedING—AND CARE OF THE BREASTS
Taking good care of the breasts is important for the health of both the mother 
and her baby. The baby should begin to breastfeed soon after it is born. A baby 
may want to breastfeed right away or just lick the breast and be held. Encourage 
the baby to suck because it will help the milk to start flowing. This will also help the 
mother’s womb to contract and the afterbirth to come out sooner. The mother’s first 
milk is a thick yellow liquid (called colostrum). The first milk has everything a new 
baby needs to prevent infection and is rich in protein. The first milk is very good 
for the baby, so...
BEGIN BreastfeedING EARLY 
Put the baby to the mother’s breast as soon as possible.
TO MILK THE BREASTS BY HAND
Take hold of the breasts 
way back, like this,
then move your hands 
forward, squeezing.
To squeeze the milk out, 
press behind the nipple.
When a baby is sick and unable to take much milk,
it is important that the mother keep producing lots of milk
by milking her breasts with her hands.
Normally, the breasts make as much milk as the baby needs. If the baby empties 
them, they begin to make more. If the baby does not empty them, soon they make 
less. When a baby gets sick and stops sucking, after a few days the mother’s 
breasts stop making milk. So when the baby can suck again, and needs a full 
amount of milk, there may not be enough. For this reason,
Another reason it is important to milk the breasts if the baby stops sucking is that 
this keeps the breasts from getting too full. When they are too full, they are painful. A 
breast that is painfully full is more likely to develop an abscess. Also, the baby may 
have trouble sucking when the breast is very full.
If your baby is too weak to suck, squeeze milk out of your breast by hand and 
give it to the baby by spoon or dropper.
Regular bathing will help to keep your breasts clean. It is not necessary to clean 
your breasts and nipples each time you breastfeed your baby. Do not use soap 
to clean your breasts, as this may cause cracking of the skin, sore nipples, and 
infection.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
278
Sore or Cracked Nipples
Sore or cracked nipples develop when the baby sucks only the nipple instead of 
taking the nipple and part of the breast when she is breastfeeding.
Treatment:
It is important to keep breastfeeding the 
baby even if it hurts. To avoid sore nipples, 
breastfeed often, for as long as the baby 
wants to suck, and be sure the baby is 
taking as much of the breast into her mouth 
as she can. It also helps to change the 
baby’s position each time she nurses.
If only one nipple is sore, let the baby suck on the other side first, then let the baby 
suck from the sore nipple. After the baby is finished, squeeze out a little milk and rub 
the milk over the sore nipple. Let the milk dry before covering the nipple. The milk will 
help the nipple heal. If the nipple oozes a lot of blood or pus, milk the breast by hand 
until the nipple is healed.
Painful Breasts
Pain in the breast can be caused by a sore nipple or breasts that get very full and 
hard. The pain will often go away in a day or two if the baby breastfeeds frequently and 
the mother rests in bed and drinks lots of liquids. Usually, antibiotics are not needed, 
but see the next section.
Breast Infection (Mastitis) and Abscess
Painful breasts and sore or cracked nipples can lead to an 
infection or abscess (pocket of pus).
Signs:
•  Part of the breast becomes hot, red, swollen, and very painful.
•  Fever or chills.
•  Lymph nodes in the armpit are often sore and swollen.
•  A severe abscess sometimes bursts and drains pus.
Treatment:
♦	 Keep breastfeeding frequently, giving the baby the infected breast first, or milk 
the breast by hand, whichever is less painful.
♦	 Rest and drink lots of liquids.
♦	 Use hot compresses on the sore breast for 15 minutes before each feeding. Use 
cold compresses on the sore breast between feedings to reduce pain.
♦	 Gently massage the sore breast while the baby is nursing.
♦	 Take acetaminophen (p. 379) for pain.
♦	 Use an antibiotic. Dicloxacillin is the best antibiotic to use (p. 350). Take 
500 mg. by mouth, 4 times each day, for a full 7 days. Erythromycin (p. 354) or 
cotrimoxazole (p. 357) can also be used.
Prevention:
♦ Keep the nipples from cracking (see above) and don’t let the breasts get overfull.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
279
Breast Cancer
Most women have some small lumps in their breasts. These lumps can change in 
size and shape, and become tender during her monthly cycle. Sometimes, a breast 
lump that does not go away can be a sign of breast cancer. Successful treatment 
depends on spotting the first sign of possible cancer and getting medical care soon. 
Surgery is usually necessary.
Signs of breast cancer:
• 	The woman may notice a slow-growing lump 
during self‑examination of the breasts  
(see below).
• 	Or the breast may have an abnormal dent  
or dimple—or many tiny pits like the skin  
of an orange.
• 	Often there are swollen lymph nodes  
in the armpit, which may or may not  
be painful.
• 	There may be redness or a sore on the breast that does not heal.
• 	She may have abnormal discharge from a nipple.
• 	At first it usually does not hurt or get hot. Later it may hurt.
SELF-EXAMINATION OF THE BREASTS
Every woman should learn how to examine 
her own breasts for possible signs of cancer. 
She should do it once a month, preferably on 
the 10th day after her menstrual period started.
♦	 Use a mirror to look at your breasts carefully 
for any new difference between the two in 
size or shape. Try to notice any of the above 
signs.
♦ 	 While lying with a pillow or folded blanket 
under your back, feel your breasts with the 
flat of your fingers. Press your breast and 
roll it beneath your finger tips. Start near the 
nipple and go around the breast and up into 
the armpit.
♦ 	 Squeeze your nipples. If blood or a discharge 
comes out, get medical help.
If you find a lump that is smooth or rubbery, and moves under the skin when you 
push it, don’t worry about it. But if it is hard, has an uneven shape, is painless, or 
does not move when you push it, get medical advice. Many lumps are not cancer, 
but it is important to find out early.
A painful, hot lump in the breast of a nursing mother 
is probably a breast abscess (infection).
 A painless breast lump may be cancer, or a cyst.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
280
LUMPS OR GROWTHS IN THE LOWER PART OF THE BELLY
The most common lump is, of course, caused by 
the normal development of a baby. Abnormal lumps or 
masses may be caused by:
•	 a cyst or watery swelling, often in the ovaries
•	 a baby that has accidentally begun to develop 
outside of the womb (ectopic pregnancy), or 
•	 cancer
All 3 of these conditions are usually painless or mildly 
uncomfortable at first, and become very painful later. All require medical attention and 
usually surgery. If you find any unusual, gradually growing lump, seek medical advice.
Cancer of the womb
Cancer of the uterus (womb), cervix (neck of the womb), or ovaries is most common 
in women over 40. The first sign may be anemia or unexplained bleeding. Later, an 
uncomfortable or painful lump in the belly may be noticed.
There is a special test called a Pap smear (Papanicolaou) to find cancer of the cervix 
when it is just beginning. Where it is available, all women over 20 should try to get a 
Pap smear once a year. Another method is called ‘visual inspection’ and uses a vinegar 
solution painted on the cervix. If this makes tissue turn white, then further testing or 
treatment is needed.
At the first suspicion of cancer, seek medical help.
womb or 
uterus— 
where a baby 
is normally 
made
There may be abnormal menstrual 
bleeding together with signs of 
pregnancy—also severe cramps low in 
the belly and a painful lump outside the 
womb.
A baby that begins to form out of place 
cannot live. Ectopic pregnancy requires 
surgery in a hospital. If you suspect 
this problem, seek medical advice 
soon, as dangerous bleeding could 
start any time.
tube 
to ovary
ovary—where 
the eggs are 
made
vagina
vulva— 
or lips of 
vagina
Sometimes a baby begins to form 
outside the womb, in one of the tubes 
that comes from the ovaries.
Out-of-place or Ectopic Pregnancy
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
281
MISCARRIAGE (SPONTANEOUS ABORTION)
A miscarriage is the loss of the unborn baby. Miscarriages are most frequent in 
the first 3 months of pregnancy. Usually the baby is imperfectly formed, and this is 
nature’s way of taking care of the problem.
Most women have one or more miscarriages in 
their lifetime. Many times they do not realize that they 
are having a miscarriage. They may think their period 
was missed or delayed, and then came back in a 
strange way, with big blood clots. A woman should 
learn to know when she is having a miscarriage, 
because it could be dangerous.
A woman who has heavy bleeding after she 
has missed one or more periods probably is 
having a miscarriage.
A miscarriage is like a birth in that the embryo (the 
beginning of the baby) and the placenta (afterbirth) 
must both come out. Heavy bleeding with big blood 
clots and painful cramps often continues until both 
are completely out.
Treatment:
The woman should rest and take ibuprofen (p. 379) or codeine (p. 383) for pain.
If heavy bleeding continues for many days:
♦	 Get medical help. A simple operation may be needed to clean out the womb 
(dilatation and curettage, or D and C, or suction).
♦	 Stay in bed until the heavy bleeding stops.
♦	 If the bleeding is extreme, follow the instructions on page 266.
♦	 If fever or other signs of infection develop, treat as for Childbirth Fever 
(see p. 276)
♦	 A woman may continue to bleed a little for several days after the miscarriage. 
It will be similar to her menstrual flow (period).
♦	 She should not douche or have sex for at least 2 weeks after the miscarriage, 
or until the bleeding stops.
♦	 If she is using an IUD and has a miscarriage, serious infection may occur. 
Seek medical help fast, have the IUD removed, and give antibiotics.
The embryo of a  
miscarriage may be no longer 
than 1 or 2 centimeters. 
30 days
60 days
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
282
HIGH RISK MOTHERS AND BABIES
A note to midwives or health workers or anyone who cares:
Some women are more likely to have difficult births and problems following birth, 
and their babies are more likely to be underweight and sick. Often these are mothers 
who are single, homeless, poorly nourished, very young, mentally slow, or who already 
have malnourished or sickly children.
Often if a midwife, health worker, or someone else takes special interest in these 
mothers, and helps them find ways to get the food, care, and companionship they 
need, it can make a great difference in the well-being of both the mothers and their 
babies.
Do not wait for those in need to come to you. Go to them.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
283
BOTH THESE FAMILIES LIVE IN POOR COMMUNITIES:
Some mothers and fathers want a lot of children—especially in countries where 
poor people are denied a fair share of land, resources, and social benefits. This is 
because children help with work and provide care for their parents in old age. In 
such areas, having just a few children may be a privilege only wealthier people can 
afford.
The situation is different in poor countries where resources and benefits are fairly 
distributed. Where employment, housing, and health care are guaranteed and where 
women have equal opportunities for education and jobs, people usually choose to 
have smaller families. This is in part because they do not need to depend on their 
children for economic security.
In any society, parents have a right to make their own decision about how many 
children to have, and when to have them.
Different parents have different reasons for wanting to limit the size of their 
family. Some young parents may decide to delay having any children until they 
have worked and saved enough so that they can afford to care for them well. Some 
parents may decide that a small number of children is enough, and they never want 
more. Others may want to space their children several years apart, so that both 
the children and their mother will be healthier. Some parents feel they are too old to 
have more children. In some places, men and women know that if they have a lot of 
children, when the children grow up there may not be enough land for all of them to 
grow the food their families need.
This family lives where wealth 
is distributed unfairly.
This family lives where 
resources are distributed fairly.
20
CHAPTER
Family Planning­—
Having the Number
of Children You Want
284
FAMILY PLANNING
Having the number of children you want, when you 
want them, is called family planning. If you decide to 
wait to have children, you can choose one of several 
methods to prevent pregnancy. These methods are called 
family planning methods, child spacing methods, or 
contraception.
Every year, half a million women die of problems 
from pregnancy, childbirth, and unsafe abortion. Most 
of these deaths could be prevented by family planning. 
For example, family planning can prevent dangers from 
pregnancies that are:
•	 in young women. Women under the age of 18 are more likely to die in childbirth 
because their bodies are not fully grown. Their babies have a greater chance of 
dying in the first year.
•	 in older women. Older women face more danger in child bearing, especially if 
they have other health problems or have had many children.
•	 too close. A woman’s body needs time to recover between pregnancies.
•	 too many. A woman with more than 4 children has a greater risk of death after 
childbirth from bleeding and other causes.
Millions of women safely use the family planning methods described in this chapter 
and on pages 394 to 397.
Choosing a Family Planning Method
On the following pages, several methods of family planning are described. Each 
one works better for some people than others. Study these pages and talk with your 
midwife, health worker, or doctor about what methods are available and are likely to 
work best for you. As you read about each method, here are some questions you may 
want to consider:
Family planning methods work best when both the man and the woman take 
responsibility for preventing pregnancy and protecting each other from sexually 
transmitted infections (STIs).
The chart on the next page shows how well each family planning method works to 
prevent pregnancy and to protect against STIs. The stars in the chart show how well 
each method prevents pregnancy. When a man and a woman use a method correctly 
every time they have sex, the method will work better.
•	 How well does it prevent pregnancy? 
How effective is it?
•	 How well does it protect against 
HIV and other sexually transmitted 
infections, if at all?
•	 How safe is it? If a woman has any of 
the health problems mentioned in this 
chapter, she may need to avoid some 
types of family planning methods.
•	 How easy is it to use?
•	 How much does it cost?
•	 Is it easy to get? Will you need to 
visit the health center often?
•	 Will the side effects (the problems 
the method may cause) create 
difficulties for you?
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
285
Condom for 
men
Condom for 
women
Spermicide
Family planning  
method
Protection 
from 
pregnancy
Protection 
from STIs
Possible  
side effects
Other important 
information
★★
★★
★★
★
★★★
skin 
allergy
nausea, 
headaches, 
changes 
in monthly 
bleeding
Most effective when 
used with spermicide 
and lubricant (liquid to 
wet the condom).
Less effective when 
the woman is on top 
of the man during sex.
Most effective 
when used with 
spermicide.
More effective when 
used with another 
method like diaphragm 
or condom.
These methods may 
be dangerous for 
women with certain 
health problems. 
Consult a health 
worker.
good
good
some
good
very good
Hormonal methods
Birth control pill, 
patch, injections
Implants
best
★★★★
Pulling out
(withdrawal)
★
some
More effective when 
used with another 
method like spermicide 
or diaphragm.
Diaphragm
(with spermicide)
IUD
★★★★
heavy and 
painful 
monthly 
bleeding
This method may be 
dangerous for women 
with certain health 
problems. Consult a 
health worker.
best
Sex without 
intercourse
(penis not inside 
vagina at all)
★★★★
best
Couples may have a 
hard time sticking to 
this method.
Breastfeeding
(during the first 
6 months only)
★★
To use this method, 
a woman must give 
her baby only breast 
milk, and her monthly 
bleeding must not 
have returned yet.
good
The mucus 
method
★★
To use this method 
correctly, a woman 
must understand 
when she is fertile.
good
Sterilization
★★★★
Women or men will 
never be able to 
have babies after this 
operation.
best
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
286
BIRTH CONTROL PILLS (ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES)
Birth control pills are made of chemicals (hormones) that normally occur in a 
woman’s body. When taken correctly, the ‘pill’ is one of the most effective methods for 
avoiding pregnancy. However, certain women should not take birth control pills if they 
can use another method (see p. 288). Birth control pills do not prevent HIV or any other 
sexually transmitted infections. To prevent these infections, use a condom (p. 290). 
The pills usually come in packets of 21 or 28 tablets. The packets of 21 are often 
less expensive, and of these, some brands are cheaper than others. The amount of 
medicine differs in different brands. To pick the kind that is right for you, talk to a health 
worker, midwife, or see the GREEN PAGES, pages 393 and 394. The pills will not 
prevent pregnancy immediately. So, during the first 7 days on pills, use condoms or 
another method to avoid pregnancy.
How to take the pills—packet of 21:
Take the first pill on the first day of your period, counting the first day of the period as 
day 1. Then take 1 pill every day until the packet is finished (21 days). Take your pills 
at the same time each day.
After finishing the packet, wait 7 days before taking any more pills. Then begin 
another packet, 1 pill each day.
This way, you will take the pills for 3 weeks out of each month, then go 1 week 
without taking any. Normally, the menstrual period will come during the week when the 
pill is not taken. Even if the period does not come, start the new packet 7 days after 
finishing the last one.
If you do not want to get pregnant, it is important to take the pills as 
directed—1 every day. If you forget to take the pill one day, take it as soon as you 
realize this, or take 2 the next day.
Packet of 28 pills:
Take the first pill on the first day of the period, just as with the packets of 21. Take  
1 a day. Seven of the pills will probably be a different size and color. Take these pills 
last (one a day) after the others have all been taken. The day after you finish the packet 
of 28, start another packet. Take 1 a day without ever missing a day, packet after 
packet, for as long as you want not to get pregnant.
No special diet must be followed when taking the pill. Even if you happen to get 
sick with a cold or another common illness while taking birth control pills, go right on 
taking them. If you stop taking the pills before the packet is used up, you may become 
pregnant.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
287
Side effects:
Some women get a little morning sickness, swelling of the breasts, or other signs 
of pregnancy when they first start taking the pill. This is because the pill contains the 
same chemicals (hormones) that a woman’s body puts into her blood when she is 
pregnant. These signs do not mean she is unhealthy or should stop taking the pill. 
They usually go away after the first 2 or 3 months. If the signs do not go away, she 
may need to change to a kind with a different amount of hormone. This is discussed 
in the GREEN PAGES (p. 393 and 394).
Most women bleed less than usual in their monthly period when they are taking 
the pill. This change is usually not important.
“Is it dangerous to take oral contraceptives?”
Like all medicines, birth control pills may cause serious problems in certain 
persons (see next pages). The most serious problems related to the pill are blood 
clots in the heart, lungs, or brain (see stroke, p. 327). This occurs most often in 
women over 35 who smoke tobacco. However, the chance of getting dangerous 
clots is higher when women get pregnant than when they take the pill. But for some 
women, both pregnancy and taking birth control pills have a higher risk. These 
women should use other methods of family planning.
A woman rarely becomes pregnant while taking the pill. But if this happens, 
immediately stop taking the pill. It can harm the developing baby.
Death related to taking the pill is rare. On the average, pregnancy and childbirth 
are 50 times more dangerous than taking the pill.
Of 15,000 women who take 
birth control pills, only 1 is 
likely to die from problems 
related to having taken the pills.
Of 15,000 women who become 
pregnant, this many are likely to 
die from problems of pregnancy 
or childbirth.
Conclusion:
IT IS MUCH SAFER TO TAKE THE PILL THAN TO BECOME PREGNANT.
EMERGENCY PILLS
If for whatever reason your family planning method was not used properly before 
sex, you can still avoid becoming pregnant by taking a larger-than-usual amount of 
some kinds of birth control pills, or special pills made for this purpose, soon after 
having sex. See page 394.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
288
Who Should Not Take Birth Control Pills?
A woman who has any of the following signs should not take oral (or injected) 
contraceptives:
•   A woman whose period is late, who thinks she might be pregnant.
•   Deep or steady pain in one leg.
This may be caused by an inflamed 
vein (phlebitis or blood clot). Do 
not use birth control pills. (Women 
with varicose veins that are not 
inflamed can usually take birth 
control pills without problems. But 
they should stop taking them if the 
veins become inflamed.)
•	 Stroke. A woman who has had any 
signs of a stroke (p. 327) should 
not take the pill.
•	 Hepatitis (p. 172), cirrhosis 
(p. 328), or other liver disease. 
Women with these problems, or 
whose eyes had a yellow color during 
pregnancy, should not take the pill. It 
is better not to take oral contraceptives 
for one year after having hepatitis.
•	 Cancer. If you have had or suspect cancer 
of the breast or womb, do not use oral 
contraceptives. Before beginning oral 
contraceptives, examine your breasts 
carefully (see p. 279). In some health 
centers you may also be able to get a 
simple test (Pap smear or vinegar test) to 
check for cancer of the cervix or opening of 
the womb. Birth control pills have not been 
proven to cause cancer of the breasts or 
womb. But if cancer already exists, the pill can make it worse.
Some health problems may be made worse by oral contraceptives. If you have any 
of the following problems, it is better to use another method if you can:
•	 Migraine (p. 162). Women who suffer from true migraine headaches should not 
take oral contraceptives. But simple headaches that go away with aspirin are no 
reason not to take the pill.
•	 Heart disease (p. 325).
•	 High blood pressure (p. 125).
If you suffer from tuberculosis, diabetes, gall bladder problems, kidney disease, or 
epilepsy, it is best to get medical advice before taking birth control pills. However, most 
women with these diseases can take oral contraceptives without harm.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
289
Precautions Women Should Take when Using Birth Control Pills
1. Do not smoke, 
especially if you are 
over 35. It can cause 
heart problems.
2. Examine the breasts 
carefully every month for 
lumps or possible signs 
of cancer (see page 279).
3. If possible, have 
your blood pressure 
measured every 
6 months.
Some people claim birth 
control pills cause cancer. 
Is this true?
Can a woman have 
children again if she 
stops taking the pill?
Is the chance of having 
twins or defective children 
greater if a woman has 
used oral contraceptives?
Is it true that a mother’s 
breasts will dry up if she 
starts taking birth control 
pills?
No! However, if cancer of the breast 
or womb already exists, taking the pill 
may make the tumor grow faster.
Yes. (Sometimes there is a delay 
of 1 or 2 months before she can 
become pregnant.)
No. The chances are the same 
as for women who have not 
taken the pill.
It is best to wait until her milk is coming 
in well before starting to take the pills. 
This usually takes about 3 weeks. After 
that, the pills are perfectly safe for 
women who are breastfeeding. 
She can also take the ‘mini pill’ (p. 395), which contains so little 
hormone that it does not affect the milk, even in the first 3 weeks.
For information on the selection of birth control pills, see pages 394 and 395.
4. Watch for any of the problems mentioned on page 288, especially:
	 •  Severe and frequent migraine headaches (p. 162).
	 •  Dizziness, headache, or loss of consciousness that results in difficulty in 
seeing, speaking, or moving part of the face or body (see Stroke, p. 327).
	 •  Pain with inflammation in a leg or hip (chance of a blood clot).
	 •  Severe or repeated pain in the chest (see Heart Problems, p. 325).
	 •  Severe pain in the abdomen.
If one of these problems develops, stop taking the pill and get medical 
advice. Avoid pregnancy by using another method, as these problems also make 
pregnancy especially dangerous.
Questions and Answers about Birth Control Pills
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
290
OTHER METHODS OF FAMILY PLANNING
THE CONDOM is a thin rubber sheath that covers the man’s 
penis. It prevents the man’s sperm from entering the woman’s vagina 
and womb during sex. Condoms made of latex are also the best 
protection against STIs and HIV. The condom should be put on when 
the man’s penis is hard but before it touches the woman’s genitals. After 
he ejaculates (comes), the man should hold the condom and withdraw 
from the woman’s vagina while the penis is still hard. Then take off the 
condom without spilling the sperm, tie it shut, and discard it. A couple 
should use a new condom every time they have sex. Keep condoms in a 
cool, dry place away from sunlight. Condoms from old or torn packages are 
more likely to break.
THE CONDOM FOR WOMEN is a thin, plastic sheath that fits inside the 
vagina. A flexible ring at the closed end of the condom holds it in place. The 
other ring at the open end hangs out, covering the outer lips of the vagina. 
This condom can be put in up to 6 hours before sex and should be taken out 
immediately after sex. It should be used only once, because it may break if it 
is washed and reused. But washing out and reusing a female condom up to 
5 times is better than no condom. The female condom is the most effective 
method controlled by women for protecting against both pregnancy and 
STIs, including HIV. The female condom should not be used with a male 
condom.
THE DIAPHRAGM is a shallow cup made of soft rubber that a woman 
wears in her vagina. It can be put in anytime and should be left in for 
at least 6 hours after having sex. Diaphragms come in different sizes. 
A trained health worker can recommend the right size for each woman. 
After each use, the woman should wash the diaphragm with soap and 
water, and dry it. Keep it in a clean dry place. A diaphragm usually lasts 
about 2 years. Check it regularly for holes by holding it up to the light. 
If there is even a tiny hole, get a new one. A diaphragm may give 
some protection against STIs.
SPERMICIDES are foam, tablets, cream, or jelly that are put into 
the vagina before having sex. Spermicide kills the man’s sperm 
before it can get into the womb. It does not protect against STIs or 
HIV. Tablets should be put in the vagina 10 to 15 minutes before 
having sex. Foam, jelly, or cream work best if they are put in the 
vagina just before having sex. Add spermicide each time you have 
sex. After sex, do not douche or wash the spermicide out for at least 6 hours. Some 
spermicides can cause itching or irritation inside the vagina.
THE INTRAUTERINE DEVICE (IUD) is a small object that is inserted 
in the womb by a specially trained health worker or midwife. The 
IUD prevents the man’s sperm from fertilizing the woman’s egg. The 
IUD can be inserted any time a woman and her health worker are 
reasonably sure the woman is not pregnant and does not have any 
signs of a vaginal infection or an STI. A woman can ask a trained 
health care worker or midwife to remove the IUD any time she 
wants to change methods or get pregnant. The IUD does not 
protect against STIs.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
291
THE COUNTING DAYS METHOD
This method is not very sure to prevent pregnancy, but it has the advantage of 
not costing anything. It is more likely to work for a woman whose periods come 
very regularly, more or less once every 28 days. Also, the husband and wife must 
be willing to pass 11 days out of each month without having sex the regular way.
Usually a woman has a chance of becoming pregnant only during 11 days of her 
monthly cycle—her ‘fertile days’. These 11 days come midway between her periods, 
beginning 8 days after the first day of menstrual bleeding. To avoid getting pregnant, 
a woman should not have sex with her man during these 11 days. During the rest of 
the month, she is not likely to get pregnant.
To avoid confusion the woman should mark on a calendar the 11 days she is not 
to have sex.
For example: Suppose your period 
begins on the 5th day of May. Count 
that as day number 1.
Mark it like this:
Then count 8 days. Starting 
with the 8th day, put a line  
under the next 11 days like this:
During these 11 ‘fertile days’, 
do not have sexual relations.
Now suppose your next period 
begins on the first of June. Mark it 
the same way, like this:
Once again count off 8 days 
and underline the following 11 days 
in which you will not have sexual 
contact.
If the woman and her husband carefully avoid having sex together during these 
11 days of each month, it is possible that they will go years without having another 
child. However, few couples are successful for very long. This is not a very sure 
method, unless used in combination with another method such as a diaphragm or 
condoms, especially during the days from the end of the menstrual period until the 
fertile days are over.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
292
THE MUCUS METHOD
This is a variation of the counting days method. A woman finds out when she could 
become pregnant by checking the mucus in her vagina every day. It works fairly well 
for some couples but not for others. In general it cannot be considered a very sure 
way of preventing pregnancy, but it costs nothing and has no risks other than those 
that come with pregnancy itself. However, it is more difficult to do if the woman has a 
vaginal infection with a lot of discharge, if her periods are not regular, or if she douches 
or washes out her vagina.
Every day, except during her period, the woman should examine the mucus from 
her vagina. Take a little mucus out of your vagina with a clean finger and try to make it 
stretch between your thumb and forefinger, like this:
As long as the mucus is sticky like 
paste—not slippery or slimy—you 
probably cannot become pregnant, 
and can continue to have sexual 
relations.
When the mucus begins to get slippery or 
slimy, like raw egg, or if it stretches between 
your fingers, you may become pregnant 
if you have sexual relations. So, do not 
have sex when the mucus is slippery 
or stretches, or until 2 days after it has 
stopped being slippery or stretchy and 
has become sticky again.
The mucus will usually become slippery during a few days midway between your 
periods. These are the same days you would not have sex with your man if you were 
using the counting days method.
To be more sure, use the mucus and counting days methods together. To be still 
more sure, see below. The mucus and counting days methods do not protect against 
STIs, including HIV.
Combined Methods
If you want to be more certain not to become pregnant, it often helps to use 
2 methods at the same time. The counting days or mucus method combined with 
the use of a condom, diaphragm, spermicide, or sponge is surer than any of these 
methods alone. Likewise, if a man uses condoms and the woman a diaphragm, the 
chance of pregnancy is very low.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
293
INJECTIONS. In this family planning method, a 
woman is given injections of hormones every 1 to 3 
months, usually at a health center or family planning 
clinic, by someone who knows how. The first injection 
can be given any time a woman and her health worker 
are reasonably sure the woman is not pregnant. The 
injection protects against pregnancy immediately if it is 
given within 5 days after monthly bleeding begins. If the 
injection is given 6 or more days after the beginning of 
monthly bleeding, the woman and her partner should use 
condoms or not have sex for the next 7 days. For more 
information see page 396.
IMPLANTS are small, soft tubes that are placed under 
the skin on the inside of a woman’s arm. These tubes 
contain the hormone progestin and prevent pregnancy 
from 6 months to 5 years, depending on the type of implant. The tubes must be 
inserted and removed by a trained health worker, usually at a clinic or family planning 
center. They can be inserted any time a woman and her health worker are reasonably 
sure the woman is not pregnant. If a woman is breastfeeding, implants can be 
inserted 6 weeks after the baby was born. For more information see page 397.
METHODS FOR THOSE WHO NEVER WANT TO HAVE 
MORE CHILDREN
STERILIZATION. For those who never want to have more children, there are 
fairly safe, simple operations for both men and women. In many countries these 
operations are free. Ask at the health center. Sterilization does not protect against 
STIs, including HIV.
•	 For men, the operation is called a vasectomy. It can be 
done simply and quickly in a doctor’s office or a health 
center, usually without putting the man to sleep. Small 
cuts are made here so that the tubes from the man’s 
testicles can be cut and tied. The testicles are not 
removed.
The operation has no effect on the man’s sexual 
ability or pleasure. His fluid comes just the same, but 
has no sperm in it.
•	 For women, the operation is called a tubal ligation, 
which means to tie the tubes. One method is to 
make a small cut in the lower belly so that the tubes 
coming from the ovaries, or egg-makers, can be cut 
and tied. It can usually be done in a doctor’s office 
or health center without putting the woman to sleep. 
Although usually successful, there is a higher risk of 
infection in the operation for women than for men.
This operation has no effect on the woman’s menstrual 
periods or sexual ability, and may make having sex more 
pleasant because she does not have to worry about pregnancy.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
294
HOME METHODS FOR PREVENTING PREGNANCY
Every community has traditional methods to prevent or stop pregnancy. Some of 
these can help limit the number of children a couple has, but they are usually not as 
effective as modern methods. Some traditional methods can be harmful, and some 
do not work at all. For example, washing out the vagina or urinating after sex will not 
prevent pregnancy.
WITHDRAWAL OR PULLING OUT (coitus interruptus). The man pulls his penis out of 
the woman and away from her genitals before the sperm comes. This method is better 
than no method, but it does not always work. Sometimes a man is not able to pull 
out before he ejaculates (comes). Even if the man pulls out in time, some liquid that 
contains sperm can leak out of his penis before ejaculation and cause pregnancy.
BreastfeedING FOR THE FIRST 6 MONTHS. 
Breastfeeding is an effective method of family planning only 
when these 3 conditions are true:
1. The woman’s baby is less than 6 months old.
2. The woman has not had her monthly bleeding since 
giving birth.
3. The woman is giving the baby only breast milk, and is 
feeding the baby whenever he is hungry—with no more 
than 6 hours between feedings—day and night. The 
baby does not sleep through the night without feeding.
THE SPONGE METHOD. This is a home method that is not harmful and sometimes 
works. You cannot be sure it will prevent pregnancy every time, and it does not protect 
against HIV or other STIs, but it can be used when no other method is available.
You will need a sponge and either vinegar, lemons, or salt. 
Either a sea sponge or an artificial sponge will work. If you do 
not have a sponge, try a ball of cotton, wild kapok, or soft cloth.
♦ Mix:
2 tablespoons vinegar in 1 cup clean water
or
1 teaspoon lemon juice in 1 cup clean water
or
1 spoon of salt in 4 spoons clean water
♦ Wet the sponge with one of these liquids.
♦ Push the wet sponge deep into your vagina before having sex. 
You can put it in up to 1 hour before.
♦ Leave the sponge in at least 6 hours after having sex. 
Then take it out. If you have trouble getting it out, next 
time tie a ribbon or piece of string to it that you can pull.
The sponge can be washed and used again, many times. 
Keep it in a clean, dry place.
You can make up the liquid in advance and keep it in a bottle.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
295
WHAT TO DO TO PROTECT CHILDREN’S HEALTH
Chapters 11 and 12 tell more about the importance of nutritious food, cleanliness, 
and vaccination. Parents should read these chapters carefully and use them to help 
care for—and teach—their children. The main points are briefly repeated here.
Nutritious Food
It is important that children eat the most nutritious foods they can get, so that they 
grow well and do not get sick.
The best foods for children at different ages are:
♦	 in the first 6 months: breast milk and nothing more.
♦	 from 6 months to 1 year: breast milk and also other nutritious foods—
such as boiled cereals, mashed-up beans, eggs, meat, cooked fruits and 
vegetables.
♦	 from 1 year on: the child should eat the same foods as adults—but more 
often. To the main food (rice, maize, wheat, potatoes, or cassava) add ‘helper 
foods’ as discussed in Chapter 11.
♦	 Above all, children should get enough to eat—several times a day.
♦	 All parents should watch for signs of malnutrition in their children and should 
give them the best food they can.
NUTRITIOUS FOOD,
CLEANLINESS,
AND VACCINATIONS
ARE THE THREE IMPORTANT ‘BODY GUARDS’ THAT 
KEEP CHILDREN HEALTHY AND PROTECT THEM AGAINST MANY SICKNESSES.
CHAPTER21
Health and Sicknesses
of Children
296
Cleanliness
Children are more likely to be healthy if their village, their homes, and they 
themselves are kept clean. Follow the Guidelines of Cleanliness explained in 
Chapter 12. Teach children to follow them—and to understand their importance. Here 
the most important guidelines are repeated:
•	 Bathe children and change their clothes often.
•	 Teach children always to wash their hands when they get up in the morning, after 
they have a bowel movement, and before they eat or handle food.
•	 Make latrines or ‘outhouses’—and teach children to use them.
•	 Where hookworm exists, do not let children go barefoot; use sandals or shoes.
•	 Teach children to brush their teeth; and do not give them a lot of candies, sweets, 
or carbonated drinks.
•	 Cut fingernails very short.
•	 Do not let children who are sick or have sores, scabies, lice, or ringworm sleep 
with other children or use the same clothing or towels.
•	 Treat children quickly for scabies, ringworm, intestinal worms, and other 
infections that spread easily from child to child.
•	 Do not let children put dirty things in their mouths or let dogs or cats lick their 
faces.
•	 Keep pigs, dogs, and chickens out of the house.
•	 Use only pure, boiled, or filtered water for drinking. This is especially important 
for babies.
•	 Do not feed babies from ‘baby bottles’, because these are hard to keep clean 
and can cause illness. Feed babies with a cup and spoon.
Vaccinations
Vaccinations protect children against many 
of the most dangerous diseases of childhood—
whooping cough, diphtheria, tetanus, polio, 
measles, tuberculosis, hepatitis, and rotavirus.
Children should be given the different 
vaccinations at different ages, as shown on 
page 147. Polio vaccines should be first given if 
possible at birth, but no later than  
2 months of age, because the risk of developing 
infantile paralysis (polio) is highest in babies 
under 1 year old.
Tetanus of the newborn can be prevented by vaccinating mothers against tetanus 
during pregnancy (see p. 250).
Be sure your children get all the vaccinations they need.
DO THIS
polio vaccine
AND
PREVENT
THIS
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
297
A child who gains weight more slowly than other children, stops gaining weight, 
or is losing weight is not healthy. He may not be eating enough or he may have a 
serious illness, or both.
A good way to check whether a child is healthy and is getting enough nutritious 
food is to weigh him each month and see if he gains weight normally. If a monthly 
record of the child’s weight is kept on a Child Health Chart, it is easy to see at a 
glance whether the child is gaining weight normally.
When used well, the charts tell mothers and health workers when a child is not 
growing normally, so they can take early action. They can make sure the child gets 
more to eat, and can check for and treat any illness the child may have.
On the next page is a typical Child Health Chart showing the ‘road to health’. This 
chart can be cut out and copied. Or larger, ready-made cards can be obtained (in 
English, Spanish, Portuguese, or Zulu) from Teaching Aids at Low Cost (TALC, see 
p. 431 for address). Similar charts are produced in local languages by the Health 
Departments in many countries.
It is a good idea for every mother to keep a Child Health Chart for each of her 
children under 5 years of age. If there is a health center or ‘under-fives clinic’ 
nearby, she should take her children, with their charts, to be weighed and to have a 
‘check‑up’ each month. The health worker can help explain the Chart and its use. To 
protect the Chart, keep it in a plastic envelope.
HOMEMADE BEAM SCALE
You can make a beam scale of dry wood or bamboo. 
Place all hooks as shown and hang the scale. To make 
kg. marks on the beam, fill 2 plastic one-liter bottles with 
water. Place the first bottle where baby would hang. 
Hang the second bottle, and where beam balances, 
make the 1 kg. mark, and so on. With a ruler, measure 
the distance between the marks, and make marks for 
200, 400, 600, and 800 grams.
CHILDREN’S GROWTH—AND THE ‘ROAD TO HEALTH’
A healthy child grows steadily. If he eats enough nutritious food, 
and has no serious illness, a child gains weight each month.
A child who grows well is healthy.
The growth chart 
slips in behind the
scales so you can
mark the child’s
weight directly
onto the chart.
It is best to hang 
this and other 
scales close to the 
ground. A baby 
may be scared of 
hanging up high.
DIRECT 
RECORDING 
SCALE
available 
from TALC 
(see p. 431)
two hooks about 5 cm. apart
scale hangs from this hook
beam (1 meter long)
movable weight 
(about 1 kilogram)
Weight is correct when beam stays horizontal.
child 
holder
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
298
SIDE ONE
GROWTH CURVE  WHO recommended Child Growth Standards 2006
UPPERLINE: 50TH CENTIL BOYS, LOWERLINE: 3rd CENTILE GIRLS
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
299
SIDE TWO
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
300
Write the month the baby was born  
in the first square for each year.  
This chart shows the baby was born in March.
How to Use the Child Health Chart
FIRST, 
simple 
hanging 
scales
WATCH THE DIRECTION 
OF THE LINE SHOWING 
THE CHILD’S GROWTH
Then look for the present month at 
the bottom of the cart (in this case, 
August of the baby’s first year).
write the 
months of 
the year 
in the little 
squares at 
the bottom 
of the chart.
SECOND, weigh the child. 
Let us suppose that a child was born in April. It is 
now August, and the child weighs 6 kilograms.
THIRD, look at the card. 
Kilograms are written on the side of the card. 
Look for the number of kilograms the child weighs 
(in this case, 6).
VERY DANGEROUS
Losing weight.
May be ill, needs 
extra care.
DANGER
Not gaining weight 
find out why
GOOD
Child growing well
WRITE ON THE CHART 
Any illness e.g. diarrhea
 measles
Admission to hospital
Solids introduced
Breastfeeding stopped
Birth of next child
like this—
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
301
FOURTH, follow the
line that goes 
out from the 6 
It is easy to know where to put the 
dot if you hold a square piece of 
paper against the chart.
Each month weigh the
child and put another
dot on the chart.
If the child is healthy,
each month the new
dot will be higher on
the chart than the last.
To see how well the
child is growing, join
the dots with lines.
1	 Line up one 
edge of the 
paper with the 
child’s weight.
and  
the lines that go 
up from August.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
302
How to Read the Child Health Chart
The 2 long curved lines on the chart  
mark the ‘Road to Health’ that a child’s 
weight should follow.
The line of dots marks the child’s 
weight from month to month, and  
from year to year.
In most normal, healthy children, 
the line of dots falls between the 2 long 
curved lines. That is why the space 
between these lines is called the Road  
to Health.
If the line of dots rises steadily, month 
after month, in the same direction as the  
long curved lines, this is also a sign  
that the child is healthy.
A healthy child who gets enough nourishing food usually begins to sit, walk, 
and speak at about the times shown here.
Walks 10 steps
without help.
Sits 
without 
help.
6 to 8 months
12 to 16 
months
11 to 18 
months
Single 
words.
Short 
phrases.
third year
Typical chart of 
THE HEALTHY, 
WELL-NOURISHED 
CHILD
In the healthy,
well-nourished
child, the
weight rises
steadily. The
dots usually lie
inside the lines
that mark the
Road to Health.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
303
A malnourished, sickly child may have a chart like the one below. Notice that 
the line of dots (his weight) is below the Road to Health. The line of dots is also 
irregular and does not rise much. This shows the child is in danger.
Typical chart of
THE UNDERWEIGHT
OR MALNOURISHED
CHILD
A child with a chart like the one above is seriously underweight. Perhaps 
he is not getting enough food. Or perhaps he has a disease like tuberculosis or 
malaria. Or both. He should be given more energy-rich foods more often. He 
should also be checked or tested for possible illnesses, and visit a health worker 
frequently until his chart shows he is gaining weight well.
IMPORTANT: Watch the direction of the line of dots.
The direction of the line of dots tells more about the child’s health than 
whether the dots are inside or below the two curved lines. For example:
DANGER! This child is not gaining weight.
Dots show that the 
child has not been 
gaining weight well, 
and during the last 
months has lost weight.
Although the dots for 
this child are below the 
2 curved lines, their 
upward direction shows 
the child is growing 
well. Some children are 
naturally smaller than 
others. Perhaps this 
child’s parents are also 
smaller than average.
WATCH THE DIRECTION 
OF THE LINE SHOWING 
THE CHILD’S GROWTH
GOOD
Child growing well
DANGER
Not gaining weight 
find out why
VERY DANGEROUS 
Losing weight.
May be ill;
needs extra care
Although the dots for 
this child are within 
the curved lines. the 
child has not been 
gaining weight well 
for several months.
GOOD! This child is gaining weight well.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
304
A typical CHILD HEALTH CHART SHOWING A CHILD’S PROGRESS:
At 6 months, the mother 
became pregnant 
again and stopped 
breastfeeding him. The 
baby was fed little more 
than corn and rice. He 
stopped gaining weight.
At 10 months he 
developed chronic 
diarrhea and began 
losing weight. He 
became very thin 
and sick.
When the child was 
13 months old, his mother 
learned about ways to give 
the child enough good food, 
even without a lot of money 
or land. He began gaining 
weight fast. By age 2 he was 
back on the Road to Health.
breast
fed
poorly
fed
diarrhea
well
fed
good
weight
gain
poor
weight
gain
weight
loss
good
weight
gain
off breast  
at 6 months
diarrhea begins 
at 10 months
nutritious feeding 
begins at 13 months
This baby was 
healthy and gained 
weight well for the 
first 6 months of 
life, because his 
mother breastfed 
him.
Child Health Charts are important. When used correctly, they help mothers know 
when their children need more nutritious food and special attention. They help 
health workers better understand the needs of the child and his family. They also let the 
mother know when she is doing a good job.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
305
REVIEW OF CHILDREN’S HEALTH PROBLEMS
DISCUSSED IN OTHER CHAPTERS
Many of the sicknesses discussed in other chapters of this book are found in 
children. Here some of the more frequent problems are reviewed in brief. For more 
information on each problem, see the pages indicated.
For special care and problems of newborn babies, see p. 270 to 275, and p. 405.
Remember: In children, sicknesses often become serious very quickly. An illness 
that takes days or weeks to severely harm or kill an adult may kill a small child in 
hours. So, it is important to notice early signs of sickness and attend to them 
right away.
Malnourished Children
Many children are malnourished because they do not get enough to eat. Or if 
they eat mainly foods with a lot of water and fiber in them, like cassava, taro root, or 
maize gruel, their bellies may get full before they get enough energy food for their 
bodies’ needs. Also, some children may lack certain things in their food, like Vitamin 
A (see p. 226) or iodine (see p. 130). For a fuller discussion of the foods children 
need, read Chapter 11, especially pages 120 to 122.
THESE TWO CHILDREN ARE MALNOURISHED
NOT VERY SERIOUS
SERIOUS
small
underweight
big belly
thin arms 
and legs
sad
underweight (he may gain 
weight for a while because 
of swelling)
dark spots, peeling skin, or 
open sores
 swollen feet
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
306
Diarrhea and Dysentery
(For more complete information see p. 153 to 160.)
The greatest danger to children with diarrhea is 
dehydration, or losing too much liquid from the body. The 
danger is even greater if the child is also vomiting. Give 
Rehydration Drink (p. 152). If the child is breastfeeding, 
continue giving breast milk, but give Rehydration Drink also.
The second big danger to children with diarrhea is 
malnutrition. Give the child nutritious food as soon as he 
will eat.
Fever (see p. 75)
In small children, high fever (over 39°) can easily 
cause seizures. To lower fever, take the clothes off 
the child. If she is crying and seems unhappy, give her 
acetaminophen (paracetamol) or ibuprofen in the right 
dosage (see p. 379), and give her lots of liquids. If she is 
very hot and shaky, wet her with cool (not cold) water 
and fan her. Also try to find the cause of the fever and treat it.
Malnutrition may cause many different problems in children, including:
In more serious cases:
•	 little or no weight gain
•	 swelling of feet (sometimes face also)
•	 dark spots, ‘bruises’, or open peeling 
sores
•	 thinness or loss of hair
•	 lack of desire to laugh or play
•	 sores inside mouth
•	 failure to develop normal intelligence
•	 ‘dry eyes’ (xerophthalmia)
•	 blindness (p. 226)
Prevent and treat malnutrition by giving your children ENOUGH TO EAT
and by feeding them MORE OFTEN. Add some high energy food,
such as oil or fat, to the main food the child eats. Also try to add
some body-building and protective foods like
beans, lentils, fruits, vegetables, and if possible, milk, eggs, fish or meat.
In mild cases:
•	 slower growth
•	 swollen belly
•	 thin body
•	 loss of appetite
•	 loss of energy
•	 paleness (anemia)
•	 desire to eat dirt (anemia)
•	 sores in corners of mouth
•	 frequent colds and other 
infections
•	 night blindness
Severe forms of general malnutrition are ‘dry malnutrition’ or marasmus, and  
‘wet malnutrition’ or kwashiorkor. Their causes and prevention are discussed on  
p. 112 and 113.
Signs of malnutrition are often first seen after an acute illness like diarrhea or 
measles. A child who is sick, or who is getting well after a sickness, has an even 
greater need for enough good food than a child who is well.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
307
Seizures (Fits, Convulsions) (see p. 178)
Common causes of seizures or convulsions 
in children are high fever, dehydration, epilepsy, 
malaria, and meningitis. If fever is high, lower it 
rapidly (see p. 76). Check for signs of dehydration 
(p. 151), malaria (p. 186), and meningitis (p. 185). 
Seizures that come suddenly without fever or other 
signs are probably epilepsy (p. 178), especially if the child seems well between 
them. Seizures or spasms in which first the jaw and then the whole body become 
stiff may be tetanus (p. 182).
Meningitis (see p. 185)
This dangerous disease may come as a 
complication of measles, mumps, or another serious 
illness. Children of mothers who have tuberculosis 
may get tubercular meningitis. A very sick child 
who lies with his head tilted way back, whose neck 
is too stiff to bend forward, and whose body makes 
strange movements (seizures) may have meningitis.
Anemia (see p. 124)
Common signs in children:
•	 pale, especially inside eyelids, gums, and fingernails
•	 weak, tires easily
•	 likes to eat dirt
Common causes:
•	 diet poor in iron (p. 124)
•	 chronic gut infections (p. 145)
•	 hookworm (p. 142)
•	 malaria (p. 186)
Prevention and Treatment:
♦ Eat iron-rich foods like meat and eggs. Beans, 
lentils, groundnuts (peanuts), and dark green vegetables also 
have some iron.
♦ Treat the cause of anemia—and do not go barefoot if hookworm is common.
♦ If you suspect hookworm, a health worker may be able to look at the child’s 
stools under a microscope. If hookworm eggs are found, treat for hookworm 
(p. 373 to 375).
♦	 If necessary, give iron salts by mouth (ferrous sulfate, p. 392).
CAUTION: Do not give iron tablets to a baby or small child. 
They could poison her. Instead, give iron as a liquid. 
Or crush a tablet into powder and mix it with food.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
308
Worms and Other Parasites of the Gut (see p. 140)
If one child in the family has worms, all the family should be treated.  
To prevent worm infections, children should:
♦	 Observe the Guidelines of Cleanliness (p. 133).
♦	 Use latrines.
♦	 Never go barefoot.
♦	 Never eat raw or partly raw meat or fish.
♦	 Drink only boiled or pure water.
Skin Problems (see Chapter 15)
Those most common in children include:
•	 scabies (p. 199)
•	 infected sores and impetigo (p. 201 and 202)
•	 ringworm and other fungus infections (p. 205)
To prevent skin problems, observe the Guidelines of 
Cleanliness (p. 133).
♦ Bathe and delouse children often.
♦ Control bedbugs, lice, and scabies.
♦ Do not let children with scabies, lice, ringworm, or 
infected sores play or sleep together with other children. Treat them early.
Pink Eye (Conjunctivitis) (see p. 219)
Wipe the eyelids clean with a clean wet cloth 
several times a day. Put an antibiotic eye ointment  
(p. 378) inside the eyelids 3 or 4 times a day. Do not 
let a child with pink eye play or sleep with others. If he 
does not get well in a few days, see a health worker.
Colds and the ‘Flu’ (see p. 163)
The common cold, with runny nose, mild fever, 
cough, often sore throat, and sometimes diarrhea is a 
frequent but not a serious problem in children.
Treat with lots of liquids. Give acetaminophen (see 
p. 379). Let children who want to stay in bed do so. 
Good food and lots of fruit help children avoid colds 
and get well quickly.
Penicillin, tetracycline, and other antibiotics do no 
good for the common cold or ‘flu’. Injections are not 
needed for colds.
If a child with a cold becomes very ill, with high fever and shallow, 
rapid breathing, he may be getting pneumonia (see p. 171), and antibiotics should 
be given. Also watch for an ear infection (next page) or ‘strep throat’ (p. 310).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
309
HEALTH PROBLEMS OF CHILDREN
NOT DISCUSSED IN OTHER chapters
Earache and Ear Infections
Ear infections are common in small children. The infection 
often begins after a few days with a cold or a stuffy nose. The 
fever may rise, and the child often cries or rubs the side of his 
head. Sometimes pus can be seen in the ear. In small children 
an ear infection sometimes causes vomiting or diarrhea. So 
when a child has diarrhea and fever be sure to check his ears.
Treatment:
♦	 It is important to treat ear infections early. Give an antibiotic like penicillin 
(p. 350) or cotrimoxazole (p. 357). In children under 3 years of age, ampicillin 
(p. 352) often works better. Give acetaminophen (p. 379) for pain. 
♦	 Carefully clean pus out of the ear with cotton, but do not put a plug of cotton, 
a stick, leaves, or anything else in the ear.
♦	 Children with pus coming from an ear should bathe regularly but should not 
swim or dive for at least 2 weeks after they are well.
Prevention:
♦	 Teach children to wipe but not to blow their noses when they have a cold.
♦	 Do not bottle feed babies—or if you do, do not let baby feed lying on his back, 
as the milk can go up his nose and lead to an ear infection.
♦	 When children’s noses are plugged up, use salt drops and suck the mucus out 
of the nose as described on p. 164.
Infection in the ear canal:
To find out whether the canal or tube going into the ear is infected, gently pull the 
ear. If this causes pain, the canal is infected. Put drops of water with vinegar in the 
ear 3 or 4 times a day. (Mix 1 spoon of vinegar with 1 spoon of boiled water.) If there 
is fever or pus, also use an antibiotic.
Sore Throat and Inflamed Tonsils
These problems often begin with the common 
cold. The throat may be red and hurt when the child 
swallows. The tonsils (two lymph nodes seen as lumps 
on each side at the back of the throat) may become 
large and painful or drain pus. Fever may reach 40°.
Treatment:
♦	 Gargle with warm salt water (1 teaspoon of salt in 
a glass of water).
♦	 Take acetaminophen for pain.
♦	 Be sure the child drinks enough, even if it hurts to 
swallow. Try giving tea or watered down fruit juice.
If pain and fever come on suddenly or continue for 
more than 3 days, see the following page.
pus
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
310
Sore throat and the danger of rheumatic fever:
For the sore throat that often comes with the common cold or flu, antibiotics 
should usually not be used and will do no good. Treat with gargles and 
acetaminophen.
However, one kind of sore throat—called strep throat—should be treated with 
penicillin. It is most common in children and young adults. It usually begins suddenly 
with severe sore throat and high fever, often without signs of a cold or cough. The 
back of the mouth and tonsils become very red, and the lymph nodes under the jaw or 
in the neck may become swollen and tender.
Give penicillin (p. 350) for 10 days. If penicillin is given early and continued for 
10 days, there is less danger of getting rheumatic fever. A child with strep throat 
should eat and sleep far apart from others, to prevent their getting it also.
Rheumatic Fever
This is a disease of children and young adults. It usually begins 1 to 3 weeks after 
the person has had a strep throat (see above).
Principal signs (usually only some of these signs are present):
•	 fever
•	 joint pain, especially in the 
wrists and ankles, later the 
knees and elbows. Joints 
become swollen, and often 
hot and red.
•	 curved red lines or lumps 
under the skin
•	 uncontrolled movements
•	 in more serious cases, 
weakness, shortness of breath, 
and perhaps chest pain
Treatment:
♦	 If you suspect rheumatic fever, see a health worker. There is a risk that the heart 
may become damaged.
♦	 Give penicillin (see p. 350).
♦	 Take aspirin in large doses (p. 378). A 12-year-old can take up to 2 tablets of 
300 mg. 4 times a day. Take them together with milk or food to avoid stomach 
pain. If the ears begin to ring, take less.
Prevention:
♦	 To prevent rheumatic fever, treat ‘strep throat’ early with penicillin—for 10 days.
♦	 To prevent return of rheumatic fever, and added heart damage, a child who has 
once had rheumatic fever should take penicillin for 10 days at the first sign of a 
sore throat. If he already shows signs of heart damage, he should take penicillin 
on a regular basis or have monthly injections of benzathine penicillin (p. 351) 
perhaps for the rest of his life. Follow the advice of an experienced health 
worker or doctor.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
311
INFECTIOUS DISEASES OF CHILDHOOD
Chickenpox
This mild virus infection begins 2 to 3 weeks after a child is 
exposed to another child who has the disease.
Signs:
First many small, red, itchy spots appear. These turn into little pimples or blisters 
that pop and finally form scabs. Usually they begin on the body, and later on the 
face, arms, and legs. There may be spots, blisters, and scabs, all at the same time. 
Fever is usually mild.
Treatment:
The infection usually goes away in a week. Bathe the child daily with soap and 
warm water. To calm itching, apply cool cloths soaked in water from boiled and 
strained oatmeal. Cut fingernails very short. If the scabs get infected, keep them 
clean. Apply hot, wet compresses, and put an antibiotic ointment on them. Try to 
keep the child from scratching.
Measles
This severe virus infection is especially dangerous 
in children who are poorly nourished or have 
tuberculosis. Ten days after being near a person with 
measles, it begins with signs of a cold—fever, runny 
nose, red sore eyes, and cough.
The child becomes increasingly ill. The mouth may 
become very sore and he may develop diarrhea.
After 2 or 3 days a few tiny white spots like salt grains appear in the mouth. A day 
or 2 later the rash appears—first behind the ears and on the neck, then on the face 
and body, and last on the arms and legs. After the rash appears, the child usually 
begins to get better. The rash lasts about 5 days. Sometimes there are scattered 
black spots caused by bleeding into the skin (‘black measles’). This means the 
attack is very severe. Get medical help.
Treatment:
♦	 The child should stay in bed, drink lots of liquids, and be given nutritious food. 
If she cannot swallow solid food, give her liquids like soup. If a baby cannot 
breastfeed, give breast milk in a spoon (see p. 120).
♦	 If possible, give vitamin A to prevent eye damage (p. 391).
♦	 For fever and discomfort, give acetaminophen (or ibuprofen).
♦	 If earache develops, give an antibiotic (p. 350).
♦	 If signs of pneumonia, meningitis, or severe pain in the ear or stomach 
develop, get medical help.
♦	 If the child has diarrhea, give Rehydration Drink (p. 152).
spots. 
blisters, and 
scabs
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
312
German Measles
German measles are not as severe as regular measles. They last 3 or 4 days.  
The rash is mild. Often the lymph nodes on the back of the head and neck become 
swollen and tender. There is often a low fever.
The child should stay in bed and take acetaminophen or ibuprofen if necessary.
Women who get German measles in the first 3 months of pregnancy may give birth 
to a child with a disability. For this reason, pregnant women who have not yet had 
German measles—or are not sure—should keep far away from children who have 
this kind of measles. Girls or women who are not pregnant can try to catch German 
measles before they get pregnant. A vaccine exists for German measles, but is not 
often available.
Mumps
The first symptoms begin 2 or 3 weeks after being exposed 
to someone with mumps.
Mumps begin with fever and pain on opening the mouth 
or eating. In 2 days, a soft swelling appears below the ears at 
the angle of the jaw. Often it comes first on one side, and later 
on the other side.
Treatment:
The swelling goes away by itself in about 10 days, without need for medicine. 
Acetaminophen or ibuprofen can be taken for pain and fever. Feed the child soft, 
nourishing foods and keep his mouth clean.
Complications:
In adults and children over 11 years of age, after the first 
week there may be pain in the belly or a painful swelling of the 
testicles in men. Persons with such swelling should stay quiet 
and put ice packs or cold wet cloths on the swollen parts to 
help reduce the pain and swelling.
If signs of meningitis or hearing problems appear, get 
medical help (p. 185).
Prevention of measles:
Children with measles should keep far away from other children, even from brothers 
and sisters. Especially try to protect children who are poorly nourished or who have 
tuberculosis or other chronic illnesses. Children from other families should not go into 
a house where there is measles. If children in a family where there is measles have not 
yet had measles themselves, they should not go to school or into stores or other public 
places for 10 days.
To prevent measles from killing children, make sure all
children are well-nourished. And have your children 
vaccinated against measles.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
313
Whooping Cough
Whooping cough begins a week or two after 
being exposed to a child who has it. It starts like a 
cold with fever, a runny nose, and cough.
Two weeks later, the whoop begins. The child 
coughs rapidly many times without taking a 
breath, until she coughs up a plug of sticky 
mucus, and the air rushes back into her lungs 
with a loud whoop. While she is coughing, her 
lips and nails may turn blue for lack of air. After 
the whoop, she may vomit. Between coughing 
spells the child seems fairly healthy.
Whooping cough often lasts 3 months or more.
Whooping cough is especially dangerous in babies under 1 year of age, so 
vaccinate children early. Small babies do not develop the typical whoop so it is hard 
to be sure if they have whooping cough or not. If a baby gets fits of coughing and 
swollen or puffy eyes when there are cases of whooping cough in your area, treat 
her for whooping cough at once.
Treatment:
♦  Antibiotics are helpful only in the early stage of whooping cough, before the 
whoop begins. It is especially important to treat babies under 6 months at 
the first sign. Use erythromycin (p. 354). If you do not have erythromycin, try 
cotrimoxazole (p. 357), but only use cotrimoxazole for children over 8 weeks old. 
♦  If the cough causes convulsions, phenobarbital (p. 389) may help.
♦  If the baby stops breathing after a cough, turn her over and pull the sticky 
mucus from her mouth with your finger. Then slap her on the back with the flat 
of your hand.
♦  To avoid weight loss and malnutrition, be sure the child gets enough nutritious 
food. Have her eat and drink shortly after she vomits.
Complications:
A bright red hemorrhage (bleeding) inside the white of the eyes may be caused 
by the coughing. No treatment is necessary (see p. 224). If seizures or signs of 
pneumonia develop (p. 171), get medical help.
Protect all children against whooping cough. See that 
they are vaccinated at 2, 4, 6, and 18 months of age.
Diphtheria
This begins like a cold with fever, sore throat, and hoarse 
voice. A yellow-gray coating or membrane may form in the back 
of the throat, and sometimes in the nose and on the lips. The 
child’s neck may become swollen. His breath smells very bad.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
314
If you suspect that a child has diphtheria:
♦ Put him to bed in a room separate from other persons.
♦  Get medical help quickly. There is special antitoxin for diphtheria.
♦ Give penicillin, 1 tablet of 400,000 units, 3 times a day for older children. Or give 
erythromycin (p. 354).
♦ Have him gargle warm water with a little salt.
♦ Have him breathe hot water vapors often or continually (p. 168).
♦ Have him sip liquids often, even if it hurts to swallow.
♦ If the child begins to choke and turn blue, try to remove the membrane from his 
throat using a cloth wrapped around your finger.
Diphtheria is a dangerous disease that can easily be prevented with the DPT 
vaccine. Be sure your children are vaccinated.
Infantile Paralysis (Polio, Poliomyelitis)
Polio is most common in children under 2. It is caused by 
a virus infection similar to a cold, often with fever, vomiting, 
diarrhea, and sore muscles. Usually the child gets 
completely well in a few days. But sometimes a part of 
the body becomes weak or paralyzed. Most often this 
happens to one or both legs. In time, the weak limb 
becomes thin and does not grow as fast as the other one.
Treatment:
Once the disease has begun, no medicine will 
correct the paralysis. (However, sometimes part or 
all of the lost strength slowly returns.) Antibiotics 
do not help. For early treatment, calm the pain with 
acetaminophen or ibuprofen and put hot soaks on 
painful muscles. Position the child to be comfortable 
and avoid contractures. Gently straighten his arms 
and legs so that the child lies as straight as possible. 
Put cushions under his knees, if necessary to reduce 
pain, but try to keep his knees straight.
Prevention:
♦	 Vaccination against polio is the best protection (see p. 147).
♦	 Do not give injections of any medicine to a child if you think his signs of a cold 
or fever, might be caused by the polio virus. Although it happens only rarely, the 
irritation caused by an injection could turn a mild case of polio without paralysis 
into a severe case, with paralysis. Never inject children with any medicine 
unless it is absolutely necessary.
♦	 Breastfeed your baby as long as possible. Breast milk protects your baby against 
infections, including polio.
Vaccinate all children against polio.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
315
A child who has been paralyzed by polio 
should eat nutritious food and do exercises to 
strengthen remaining muscles.
Help the child learn to walk as best he can. 
Fix 2 poles for support, like these, and later 
make him some crutches. Leg braces (calipers), 
crutches, and other aids may help the child to 
move better and may prevent deformities.
For more information on polio and other childhood disabilities,  
see Disabled Village Children, also published by Hesperian.
HOW TO MAKE SIMPLE CRUTCHES
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
316
PROBLEMS CHILDREN ARE BORN WITH
Dislocated Hip
Some children are born with a dislocated hip—the leg has slipped out of its joint 
in the hip bone. Early care can prevent lasting harm and a limp. So babies should be 
checked for possible hip dislocation at about 10 days after birth.
1. Compare the 2 legs. If one hip is dislocated,  
that side may show:
The upper leg partly covers this part of the body on the 
dislocated side.
There are fewer folds here.
The leg seems shorter or turns out at a strange angle.
2. Hold both legs 
with the knees 
doubled,  
like this,
and open them 
wide like this.
If one leg stops early or makes a jump or click when you 
open it wide, the hip is dislocated.
Treatment:
Carry the baby with her knees high and wide apart, like this:
Check the baby again in 2 weeks. If you still feel or hear a 
jump or click, see a health worker. A harness that holds the 
baby’s legs open for 2 weeks can prevent lasting harm. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
317
Umbilical Hernia (Belly Button that Sticks Out)
A ‘Swollen Testicle’ (Hydrocele or Hernia)
If a baby’s scrotum, or bag that holds his testicles, is 
swollen on one side, this is usually because it is filled with 
liquid (a hydrocele) or because a loop of gut has slipped  
into it (a hernia).
To find out which is the cause, shine a light through  
the swelling.
Even a big umbilical 
hernia like this one is not 
dangerous and will often 
go away by itself. If is is 
still there after age 5, an 
operation may be needed.
Get medical advice.
You can tell this from a 
swollen lymph node  
(p. 88) because the 
hernia swells when the 
baby cries or is held 
upright and disappears 
when he lies quietly.
A hernia needs surgery 
(see p. 177).
If light does not shine through, 
and if the swelling gets bigger 
when the baby coughs or cries, 
it is a hernia.
Sometimes the hernia 
causes a swelling here 
in either a boy  
or a girl.
A belly button that sticks 
out like this is no 
problem. No medicine 
or treatment is needed. 
Tying a tight cloth or 
‘belly band’ around the 
belly will not help.
A hydrocele usually goes away 
in time, without treatment. If 
it lasts more than a year, get 
medical advice.
If light shines through easily, 
it is probably a hydrocele.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
318
MENTALLY SLOW, DEAF, OR DEFORMED CHILDREN
Sometimes parents will have a child who is born deaf, mentally slow (retarded), or 
with birth defects (something wrong with part of his body). Often no reason can be 
found. No one should be blamed. Often it just seems to happen by chance.
However, certain things greatly increase the chance of birth defects. A baby is less 
likely to have something wrong if parents take certain precautions.
1. Lack of nutritious food during pregnancy can cause mental slowness or birth 
defects in babies.
To have healthy babies, pregnant women must eat enough nutritious food 
(see p. 110).
2. Lack of iodine in a pregnant woman’s diet can cause 
hypothyroidism (cretinism) in her baby. The baby’s face is puffy, and 
he looks dull. His skin and eyes may remain yellow (jaundiced) for a 
long time after he is born. His tongue hangs out, and his forehead may 
be hairy. He is weak, feeds poorly, cries little, and sleeps a lot. He is 
mentally slow, may be deaf, and usually has an umbilical hernia. He will 
begin to walk and talk later than normal babies.
To help prevent hypothyroidism, pregnant women should use 
iodized salt instead of ordinary salt (see p. 130).
If you suspect your baby may have hypothyroidism, take him to a 
health worker or doctor at once. The sooner he gets special medicine 
(thyroid) the more normal he will be.
3. Smoking or drinking of alcoholic drinks during pregnancy 
causes babies to be born small or to have other problems (see  
p. 149). Do not drink or smoke—especially during pregnancy.
4. After age 35, there is more chance that a mother will have a child with defects. 
Mongolism or Down disease, which looks somewhat like hypothyroidism, is more likely 
to occur in babies of older mothers.
It is wise to plan your family so as to have no more children after age 35 
(see Chapter 20).
5. Many medicines can harm the baby developing inside a pregnant mother. Use 
as little medicine as possible during pregnancy—and only those known to be safe.
6. When parents are blood relatives (cousins, for instance), there is a higher 
chance that their children will have birth defects or mental slowness. Cross-eyes, extra 
fingers or toes, club feet, hare lip, and cleft palate are common defects.
To lower the chance of these and other problems, do not marry a close relative. And 
if you have more than one child with a birth defect, consider not having more children 
(see Family Planning, Chapter 20).
hypothyroidism
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
319
If your child is born with a birth defect, take him to a health center. Often 
something can be done.
♦	 For cross-eyes, see p. 223.
♦	 If an extra finger or toe is very small with no 
bone in it, tie a string around it very tightly. 
It will dry up and fall off. If it is larger or has 
bone in it, either leave it or have it taken off by 
surgery.
♦	 If a newborn baby’s feet are turned 
inward or have the wrong shape 
(clubbed), try to bend them to 
normal shape. If you can do this 
easily, repeat this several times each 
day. The feet (or foot) should slowly 
grow to be normal.
If you cannot bend the baby’s 
feet to normal, take him at once to 
a health center where his feet can 
be strapped in a correct position or 
put in casts. For the best results, it is 
important to do this within 2 days 
after birth.
♦	 If a baby’s lip or the top of his mouth 
(palate) is divided (cleft), he may 
have trouble breastfeeding and 
need to be fed with a spoon or 
dropper. With surgery, his lip and 
palate can be made to look almost 
normal. The best age for surgery is 
usually at 4 to 6 months for the lip, 
and at 18 months for the palate.
7. Difficulties before and during birth sometimes result in brain damage that 
causes a child to be spastic or have seizures (fits). The chance of damage is 
greater if at birth the baby is slow to breathe, or if the midwife injected the mother 
with medicine to speed up the birth or to ‘give force’ to the mother (p. 266) before 
the baby was born.
Be careful in your choice of a midwife—and do not let your midwife use 
medicines to speed up the birth.
For more information on children with birth defects, see Disabled Village Children, 
Chapter 12.
CLUB FOOT 
WITH CAST
Hare lip  
and  
Cleft Palate 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
320
The Spastic Child (Cerebral Palsy)
A child who is spastic has tight, stiff muscles 
that he controls poorly. His face, neck, or body may 
twist, and his movements may be jerky. Often the 
tight muscles on the inside of his legs cause them 
to cross like scissors.
At birth the child may seem normal or perhaps 
floppy. The stiffness comes as he gets older. He 
may or may not be mentally slow.
The brain damage that causes cerebral palsy 
often results from brain damage at birth (when 
the baby does not breathe soon enough) or from 
meningitis in early childhood.
There are no medicines that cure the brain 
damage that makes a child spastic. But the child 
needs special care. To help prevent tightening 
of muscles in the legs or in a foot, straighten and 
bend them very slowly several times a day.
Help the child learn to roll over, sit, stand—and if possible to walk (as on p. 314). 
Encourage him to use both his mind and body as much as he can (see p. 322). Even 
if he has trouble with speaking he may have a good mind and be able to learn many 
skills if given a chance. Help him to help himself.
For more information on cerebral palsy, see Disabled Village Children, Chapter 9.
legs crossed 
like scissors
TO HELP PREVENT MENTAL RETARDATION OR BIRTH DEFECTS IN
HER CHILD, A WOMAN SHOULD DO THESE THINGS:
1. Do not have children with a cousin or other close relative.
2. Eat as well as possible during pregnancy: as much beans, fruit, vegetables, 
meat, eggs, and milk products as you can.
3. Use iodized salt instead of regular salt, especially during pregnancy.
4. Do not smoke or drink during pregnancy (see p. 149).
5. While pregnant, avoid medicines whenever possible—use only those known 
to be safe.
6. While pregnant, keep away from persons with German measles.
7. Be careful in the selection of a midwife—and do not let the midwife use 
medicines to speed up the birth or ‘give strength’ to the mother (see p. 266).
8. Do not have more children if you have more than one child with the same 
birth defect (see Family Planning, p. 283).
9. Consider not having more children after age 35.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
321
Slow Development in the First Months of Life
Some children who are born healthy do not grow well. Their minds and bodies 
are slow to develop because they do not eat enough nutritious food. During the first 
few months of life the brain develops more rapidly than at any other time. For this 
reason the nutrition of the newborn is of great importance. Breast milk is the best 
food for a baby (see The Best Diet for Babies, p. 120).
Sickle Cell Disease (Sickle Cell Anemia)
Some children of African origin (or less often from India) are born with a 
‘weakness of the blood’, called sickle cell disease. This disease is passed on from 
the parents, who often do not know they carry the ‘sickle cell’ trait. The baby may 
appear normal for 6 months, then signs may begin to appear.
Signs:
•	 fever and crying
•	 occasional swelling of the feet and fingers 
which lasts for 1 or 2 weeks
•	 big belly that feels hard at the top
•	 anemia, and sometimes yellow color in the eyes (jaundice)
•	 child frequently sick (cough, malaria, diarrhea)
•	 child grows slowly
•	 by age 2, bony bumps may appear on the head (‘bossing’)
Malaria or other infections can bring on a ‘sickle cell crisis’ with high fever and 
severe pain in the arms, legs, or belly. Anemia becomes much worse. Swellings on 
the bones may discharge pus. The child may die.
Treatment:
There is no way to change the weakness in the blood. Protect the child from 
malaria and other diseases and infections that can bring on a ‘crisis’. Take the child 
for regular monthly visits to a health worker for an examination and medicines.
♦	 Malaria. In areas where malaria is common, the child should have regular 
malaria medicines to help prevent the disease (see p. 363). Add to this a daily 
dose of folic acid (p. 392) to help build up the blood. Iron medicine (ferrous 
sulfate) is not usually necessary.
♦	 Infections. The child should be vaccinated against measles, whooping 
cough, and tuberculosis at the earliest recommended time. If the child shows 
signs of fever, cough, diarrhea, passing urine too often, or pains in the belly, 
legs or arms, take him to a health worker as soon as possible. Antibiotics may 
be necessary. Give plenty of water to drink, and acetaminophen (p. 379) for 
pain in the bones.
♦	 Avoid exposure to cold. Keep warm with a blanket at night when necessary. 
Use a foam mattress if possible.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
322
HELPING CHILDREN LEARN
As a child grows, she learns partly from what she is taught. Knowledge and 
skills she learns in school may help her to understand and do more later. School 
can be important.
But a child does much of her learning at home or in the forest or fields. She 
learns by watching, listening, and trying for herself what she sees others do. She 
learns not so much from what people tell her, as from how she sees them act. 
Some of the most important things a child can learn—such as kindness, 
responsibility, and sharing—can be taught only by setting a good example.
A child learns through adventure. She needs to learn how to do things for 
herself, even though she makes mistakes. When she is very young, protect a 
child from danger. But as she grows, help her learn to care for herself. Give her 
some responsibility. Respect her judgment, even if it differs from your own.
When a child is young, she thinks mostly of filling only her own needs. Later, 
she discovers the deeper pleasure of helping and doing things for others. 
Welcome the help of children and let them know how much it means.
Children who are not afraid ask many questions. If parents, teachers, and 
others take the time to answer their questions clearly and honestly—and to say 
they do not know when they do not—a child will keep asking questions, and as 
she grows may look for ways to make her surroundings or her village a better 
place to live.
Some of the best ideas for helping children learn and become involved 
in community health care have been developed through the Child-to-Child 
program. This is described in Helping Health Workers Learn, Chapter 24.
Or write to:
The Child-to-Child Trust
Institute of Education
20 Bedford Way 
London WC1H 0AL
England
Tel: +44 (0) 207-612-6649 
Fax: +44 (0) 207-612-6645
E-mail: ccenquiries@ioe.ac.uk
www.child-to-child.org
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
323
This chapter is about the prevention and treatment of problems seen mostly  
in older persons.
SUMMARY OF HEALTH PROBLEMS 
DISCUSSED IN OTHER CHAPTERS
Difficulties with Vision (see p. 217)
After the age of 40, many people have problems 
seeing close objects clearly. They are becoming 
farsighted. Often glasses will help.
Everyone over age 40 should watch for signs of glaucoma, which can cause 
blindness if left untreated. Any person with signs of glaucoma (see p. 222) should 
seek medical help.
Cataracts (see p. 225) and ‘flies before the eyes’ (tiny moving spots—p. 227) are 
also common problems of old age.
Weakness, Tiredness, and Eating Habits
Old people understandably have less energy and strength 
than when they were younger, but they will become even 
weaker if they do not eat well. Although older people often do 
not eat very much, they should eat some body building and 
protective foods every day (see p. 110 to 111).
Swelling of the Feet (see p. 176)
This can be caused by many diseases, but in older people 
it is often caused by poor circulation or heart trouble (see 
p. 325). Whatever the cause, keeping the feet up is the 
best treatment. Walking helps too—but do not spend much 
time standing or sitting with the feet down. Keep the feet up 
whenever possible.
22
CHAPTER
Health and Sicknesses 
of Older People
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
324
Chronic Sores of the Legs of Feet (see p. 213)
These may result from poor circulation, often 
because of varicose veins (p. 175). Sometimes 
diabetes is part of the cause (p. 127). For other 
possibilities, see page 20.
Sores that result from poor circulation heal very 
slowly.
Keep the sore as clean as possible. Wash it 
with boiled water and mild soap and change the 
bandage often. If signs of infection develop, treat as 
directed on p. 88.
When sitting or sleeping, keep the foot up.
Difficulty Urinating (see p. 235)
Older men who have difficulty urinating or whose urine drips or dribbles are 
probably suffering from an enlarged prostate gland. Turn to page 235.
Chronic Cough (see p. 168)
Older people who cough a lot should not smoke and 
should seek medical advice. If they had symptoms of 
tuberculosis when they were younger, or have ever coughed 
up blood, they may have tuberculosis.
If an older person develops a cough with wheezing or 
trouble breathing (asthma) or if his feet also swell, he may 
have heart trouble (see the next page).
Rheumatoid Arthritis (painful joints) (see p. 173)
Many older people have arthritis.
To help arthritis:
♦ Rest the joints that hurt.
♦ Apply hot compresses (see p. 195).
♦ Take a medicine for pain; aspirin is best. 
For severe arthritis, take 2 to 3 aspirin tablets 
up to 6 times a day with bicarbonate of soda,  
an antacid (see p. 380), milk, or a lot of water. (If the ears begin to ring, take less.)
♦ It is important to do exercises that help maintain as much movement as possible 
in the painful joints.
GOOD
BETTER
Where There Is No Doctor 2011 325
Treatment:
♦	 Different heart diseases may require different specific medicines, which must 
be used with great care. If you think a person has heart trouble, seek medical 
help. It is important that he have the right medicine when he needs it.
♦	 People with heart trouble should not work so hard they get chest pain or have 
trouble breathing. However, regular exercise helps prevent heart attacks.
♦	 Persons with heart problems should not eat greasy food and should lose 
weight if they are overweight. Also, they should not smoke or drink alcohol.
♦	 If an older person begins having attacks of difficult breathing or swelling of the 
feet, he should eat food that contains little or no salt for the rest of his life.
♦	 Also, taking one aspirin tablet a day may help prevent a heart attack or a stroke.
♦	 If a person has angina pectoris or heart attack, she should rest very quietly in 
a cool place until the pain goes away.
If the chest pain is very strong and does not go away with rest, or if the 
person shows signs of shock (see p. 77), the heart has probably been 
severely damaged. The person should stay in bed for at least a week 
or as long as she is in pain or shock. Then she can begin to  
sit up or move slowly, but should stay very quiet for  
amonth or more. Consider getting medical help.
Prevention: See the next page.
OTHER IMPORTANT ILLNESSES OF OLD AGE
Heart Trouble
Heart disease is more frequent in older people, especially in those who are fat, 
who smoke, or who have high blood pressure. Men and women share many of the 
same signs below, but women more often have unexplained tiredness, sleeping 
problems, and shortness of breath. Women also feel an ache or tightness in the 
chest more than the sharper pains felt by men.
Signs of heart problems:
•	 Anxiety and difficulty 
in breathing after 
exercise; asthma-like 
attacks that get worse 
when the person lies 
down (cardiac asthma).
•	 Sudden, painful attacks 
in the chest, left shoulder, 
or arm that occur when 
exercising and go away 
after resting for a few 
minutes (angina pectoris).
•	 A sharp pain like a great 
weight crushing the chest; 
does not go away with 
rest (heart attack).
•	 A rapid, weak, or 
irregular pulse. 
•	 Swelling of the feet—
worse in the afternoons.
•	 Shortness of breath 
without exercise, 
unexplained tiredness, 
weakness, dizziness.
•	 In women, a feeling 
like indigestion, nausea, 
clamminess, spasms, jaw 
pain (heart attack).
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
326
Words to Younger Persons
Who Want to Stay Healthy When They Are Older
Many of the health problems of middle and old age, including high blood pressure, 
hardening of the arteries, heart disease, and stroke, result from the way a person has 
lived and what he ate, drank, and smoked when younger. Your chances for living and 
staying healthy longer are greater if you:
1. Eat well—enough nutritious foods, but not too much rich, greasy, or salty food. 
Avoid getting overweight. Use vegetable oil rather than animal fat for cooking.
2. Do not drink a lot of alcoholic drinks.
3. Do not smoke.
4. Keep physically and mentally active.
5. Try to get enough rest and sleep.
6. Learn how to relax and deal positively with things that worry or upset you.
High blood pressure (p. 125) and hardening of the arteries (arteriosclerosis), 
which are the main causes of heart disease and stroke, can usually be prevented—
or reduced—by doing the things recommended above. The lowering of high blood 
pressure is important in the prevention of heart disease and stroke. Persons who have 
high blood pressure should have it checked from time to time and take measures to 
lower it. For those who are not successful in lowering their blood pressure by eating 
less (if they are overweight), giving up smoking, getting more exercise, and learning to 
relax, taking medicines to lower blood pressure (antihypertensives) may help.
Which of these two men is likely to live longer and be healthy in his old age?  
Which is more likely to die of a heart attack or a stroke? Why? How many reasons can you count?
Where There Is No Doctor 2011 327
Stroke (Apoplexy, Cerebro-Vascular Accident, CVA)
In older people stroke or cerebro-vascular accident (CVA) commonly results from 
a blood clot or from bleeding inside the brain. The word stroke is used because 
this condition often strikes without warning. The person may suddenly fall down, 
unconscious. Her face is often reddish, her breathing hoarse 
and noisy, her pulse strong and slow. She may remain in a coma 
(unconscious) for hours or days.
If she lives, she may have trouble speaking, seeing, or 
thinking, or one side of her face and body may be paralyzed. 
In minor strokes, some of these same problems may result 
without loss of consciousness. The difficulties caused by 
stroke sometimes get better with time.
Treatment:
Put the person in bed with her head a little higher than her feet. If she is 
unconscious, roll her head back and to one side so her saliva (or vomit) runs out 
of her mouth, rather than into her lungs. While she is unconscious, give no food, 
drink, or medicines by mouth (see the Unconscious Person, p. 78). If possible, seek 
medical help.
After the stroke, if the person remains partly paralyzed, help her to walk with a 
cane and to use her good hand to care for herself. She should avoid heavy exercise 
and anger.
Prevention: See the page before this one.
Note: If a younger or middle aged person suddenly develops paralysis on one side 
of his face, with no other signs of stroke, this is probably a temporary paralysis 
of the face nerve (Bell’s Palsy). It will usually go away by itself in a few weeks or 
months. The cause is usually not known. No treatment is needed but hot soaks 
may help. If one eye does not close all the way, bandage it shut at night to prevent 
damage from dryness.
Deafness
Deafness that comes on gradually without pain or other 
symptoms occurs most often in men over 40. It is usually 
incurable, though a hearing aid may help. Sometimes 
deafness results from ear infections (see p. 309), a head 
injury, or a plug of dry wax. For information on how to 
remove ear wax, see p. 405.
DEAFNESS WITH RINGING OF THE EARS AND DIZZINESS
If an older person loses hearing in one or both ears—occasionally with severe 
dizziness—and hears a loud ‘ringing’ or buzzing, he probably has Ménière’s 
disease. He may also feel nauseous, or vomit, and may sweat a lot. He should take 
an antihistamine, such as dimenhydrinate (Dramamine, p. 386) and go to bed until 
the signs go away. He should have no salt in his food. If he does not get better soon, 
or if the problem returns, he should seek medical advice. 
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
328
Loss of Sleep (Insomnia)
It is normal for older people to need less sleep than younger people. And they 
wake up more often at night. During long winter nights, older people may spend hours 
without being able to sleep.
Certain medicines may help bring sleep, but it is better not to use them if they are 
not absolutely necessary.
Here are some suggestions for sleeping:
♦  Get plenty of exercise during the day.
♦  Do not drink coffee or black tea, especially in the afternoon or evening.
♦  Drink a glass of warm milk or milk with honey before going to bed.
♦  Take a warm bath before going to bed.
♦  In bed, try to relax each part of your body—then your whole body and mind. 
Remember good times.
♦  If you still cannot sleep, try taking an antihistamine like promethazine (Phenergan, 
p. 385) or dimenhydrinate (Dramamine, p. 386) half an hour before going to bed. 
These are less habit-forming than stronger drugs.
DISEASES FOUND MORe OFTEN
IN PEOPLE OVER 40 YEARS OLD
Cirrhosis of the Liver
Cirrhosis usually occurs in men over 40 who for years have been 
drinking a lot of liquor (alcohol) and eating poorly.
Signs:
•	 Cirrhosis starts like hepatitis, with weakness, loss of  
appetite, upset stomach, and pain on the person’s right 
side below the ribs.
•	 As the illness gets worse, the person gets thinner and thinner. 
He may vomit blood. In serious cases the feet swell, and  
the belly swells with liquid until it looks like a drum. The 
eyes and skin may turn yellowish (jaundice).
Treatment:
When cirrhosis is severe, it is hard to cure. There are no medicines that help much. 
Most people with severe cirrhosis die from it. If you want to stay alive, at the first sign 
of cirrhosis do the following:
♦	 Never drink alcohol again! Alcohol poisons the liver.
♦	 Eat as well as possible: vegetables, fruit, and some protein (p. 110 and 111). 
But do not eat a lot of protein (meat, eggs, fish, etc.) because this makes the 
damaged liver work too hard.
♦	 If a person with cirrhosis has swelling, he should not use any salt in his food.
Prevention of this disease is easy: DO NOT DRINK SO MUCH alcohol.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011 329
Gallbladder Problems
The gallbladder is a small sac attached to the liver. It collects 
a bitter, green juice called bile, which helps digest fatty foods. 
Gallbladder disease occurs most commonly in women over 40, 
people who are overweight, and people with diabetes.
Signs:
•	 Sharp pain in the stomach at the edge of the right rib cage: 
This pain sometimes reaches up to the right side of the 
upper back.
•	 The pain may come an hour or more after eating rich or 
fatty foods. Severe pain may cause vomiting.
•	 Belching or burping with a bad taste.
•	 In severe cases, there may be fever.
•	 Occasionally the eyes may become yellow (jaundice).
Treatment:
♦	 Do not eat greasy food. Overweight (fat) people should eat small meals and 
lose weight.
♦	 Take ibuprofen to calm the pain (see p. 379). Stronger painkillers are often 
needed. (Aspirin will probably not help.)
♦	 If the person has a fever, she should take ampicillin (p. 352).
♦	 In severe or chronic cases, seek medical help. Sometimes surgery is needed.
Prevention:
Women (and men) who are overweight should try to lose weight (see p. 126). 
Avoid rich, sweet, and greasy food, do not eat too much, and get some exercise.
BILIOUSNESS
In many countries and in different languages, bad-tempered persons are said 
to be ‘bilious’. Some people believe that fits of anger come when a person has too 
much bile.
In truth, most-bad tempered persons have nothing wrong with their gallbladders 
or bile. However, persons who do suffer from gallbladder disease often live in 
fear of a return of this severe pain and perhaps for this reason are sometimes 
short‑tempered or continually worried about their health. (In fact, the term 
‘hypochondria’, which means to worry continually about one’s own health, comes 
from ‘hypo’, meaning under, and ‘chondrium’, meaning rib—referring to the position 
of the gallbladder!)
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
330
ACCEPTING DEATH
Old people are often more ready to accept their own approaching death than are 
those who love them. Persons who have lived fully are not usually afraid to die. Death 
is, after all, the natural end of life.
We often make the mistake of trying to keep a dying person alive as long as 
possible, no matter what the cost. Sometimes this adds to the suffering and strain for 
both the person and his family. There are many occasions when the kindest thing to do 
is not to hunt for ‘better medicine’ or a ‘better doctor’ but to be close to and supporting 
of the person who is dying. Let him know that you are glad for all the time, the joy and 
the sorrow you have shared, and that you, too, are able to accept his death. In the last 
hours, love and acceptance will do far more good than medicines.
Old or chronically ill persons would often prefer to be at home, in familiar 
surroundings with those they love, than to be in a hospital. At times this may mean that 
the person will die earlier. But this is not necessarily bad. We must be sensitive to the 
person’s feelings and needs, and to our own. Sometimes a person who is dying suffers 
more knowing that the cost of keeping him barely alive causes his family to go into debt 
or children to go hungry. He may ask simply to be allowed to die and—and there are 
times when this may be the wise decision.
Yet some people fear death. Even if they are suffering, the known world may be hard 
to leave behind. Every culture has a system of beliefs about death and ideas about life 
after death. These ideas, beliefs, and traditions may offer some comfort in facing death.
Death may come upon a person suddenly and unexpectedly or may be 
long‑awaited. How to help someone we love accept and prepare for his approaching 
death is not an easy matter. Often the most we can do is offer support, kindness, and 
understanding.
The death of a younger person or child is never easy. Both kindness and honesty 
are important. A child—or anyone—who is dying often knows it, partly by what her own 
body tells her and partly by the fear or despair she sees in those who love her. Whether 
young or old, if a person who is dying asks for the truth, tell her, but tell her gently, and 
leave some room for hope. Weep if you must, but let her know that even as you love 
her, and because you love her, you have the strength to let her leave you. This will give 
her the strength and courage to accept leaving you. To let her know these things you 
need not say them. You need to feel and show them.
We must all die. Perhaps the most important job of the healer is to help people 
accept death when it can or should no longer be avoided, and to help ease the 
suffering of those who still live.
331
Every family and every village should have certain medical supplies ready in 
case of emergency:
•	 The family should have a HOME MEDICINE KIT (see p. 334) with the 
necessary medicines for first aid, simple infections, and the most common 
health problems.
•	 The village should have a more complete medical kit (see VILLAGE MEDICINE 
KIT, p. 336) with supplies necessary to care for day-to-day problems as well 
as to meet a serious illness or an emergency. A responsible person should 
be in charge of it—a health worker, teacher, parent, storekeeper, or anyone 
who can be trusted by the community. If possible, all members of the village 
should take part in setting up and paying for the medical kit. Those who can 
afford more should contribute more. But everyone should understand that 
the medicine kit is for the benefit of all—those who can pay and those who 
cannot.
On the following pages you will find suggestions for what the medicine kits might 
contain. You will want to change these lists to best meet the needs and resources 
in your area. Although the list includes mostly modern medicines, important home 
remedies known to be safe and to work well can also be included.
How much of each medicine should you have?
The amounts of medicines recommended for the medicine kits are the smallest 
amounts that should be kept on hand. In some cases there will be just enough to 
begin treatment. It may be necessary to take the sick person to a hospital or go for 
more medicine at once.
The amount of medicine you keep in your kit will depend on how many people it 
is intended to serve and how far you have to go to get more when some are used 
up. It will also depend on cost and how much the family or village can afford. Some 
of the medicines for your kit will be expensive, but it is wise to have enough of the 
important medicines on hand to meet emergencies.
Note: Supplies for birth kits—the things midwives and pregnant mothers need to 
have ready for a birth—are listed on pages 254 to 255.
23
CHAPTER
The Medicine Kit
332
HOW TO CARE FOR YOUR MEDICINE KIT
1. CAUTION: Keep all medicines out of the reach of children. Any medicine taken 
in large doses can be poisonous.
2. Be sure that all medicine is well labeled and that directions for use are kept 
with each medicine. Keep a copy of this book with the medicine kit.
3. Keep all medicines and medical supplies together in a clean, dry, cool place 
free from cockroaches and rats. Protect instruments, gauze, and cotton by wrapping 
them in sealed plastic bags.
4. Keep an emergency supply of important medicines on hand at all times. Each 
time one is used, replace it as soon as possible.
5. Notice the DATE OF EXPIRATION on each medicine. If the date has passed or 
the medicine looks spoiled, destroy it and get new medicine.
Note: Some medicines, especially tetracyclines, may be very dangerous if they have 
passed their expiration date. However, penicillins in dry form (tablets or powder for 
syrup or injection) can be used for as long as a year after the expiration date if they 
have been stored in a clean, dry, and fairly cool place. Old penicillin may lose some 
of its strength so you may want to increase the dose. (CAUTION: While this is safe 
with penicillin, with other medicines it is often too dangerous to give more than the 
recommended dose.)
Keep medicines out of reach of children.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
333
BUYING SUPPLIES FOR THE MEDICINE KIT
Most of the medicines recommended in this book can be bought in the 
pharmacies of larger towns. If several families or the village got together to buy 
what they need at once, often the pharmacist may sell them supplies at lower 
cost. Or if medicines and supplies can be bought from a wholesaler, prices will be 
cheaper still.
If the pharmacy does not supply a brand of medicine you want, buy another 
brand, but be sure that it is the same medicine and check the dosage.
When buying medicines, compare prices. Some brands are much more 
expensive than others even though the medicine is the same. More expensive 
medicines are usually no better. When possible, buy generic medicines rather 
than brand-name products, as the generic ones are often much cheaper. 
Sometimes you can save money by buying larger quantities. For example, a 
600,000-Unit vial of penicillin often costs only a little more than a 300,000-Unit vial—
so buy the large vial and use it for two doses.
BE PREPARED FOR 
EMERGENCIES:
KEEP YOUR MEDICINE 
KIT WELL-SUPPLIED!
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
334
THE HOME MEDICINE KIT
Each family should have the following things in their medicine kit. These supplies 
should be enough to treat many common problems in rural areas.
Also include useful home remedies in your medicine kit.
SUPPLIES
Supply	
Price 	
Amount 	
See
	
(write in)	
recommended	 page
FOR WOUNDS AND SKIN PROBLEMS:
plastic or rubber gloves	
or plastic bags for your hands	
1 small package	
75
sterile gauze pads in	
97, 218,
individual sealed envelopes	
20	
263
1-, 2-, and 3-inch
gauze bandage rolls	
2 each	
87
clean cotton	
1 small	
14, 72,
	
package	
83, 254
adhesive tape (adhesive plaster), 
1-inch wide roll	
2 rolls	
85, 215
soap—if possible a	
1 bar or
disinfectant soap like Betadine	
small bottle	
371
70% alcohol	
¼ liter	
72, 201,
	
	
211, 254
hydrogen peroxide,	
1 small	
83, 183,
in a dark bottle	
bottle	
213
petroleum jelly (Vaseline)	
	
91, 97,
in a jar or tube	
1	
141, 199
white vinegar	
½ liter	
200, 241,
	
	
294, 309
sulfur	
100 g.	
200, 205,
	
	
206, 211
scissors	
1 pair	
85, 254,
(clean, not rusty)	
	
262
tweezers 
with pointed ends	
1 pair	
84, 175
FOR MEASURING TEMPERATURE:
thermometers:
for mouth
for rectum	
1 each	
30, 41
FOR KEEPING SUPPLIES CLEAN:
plastic bags	
several	
195, 332
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
335
MEDICINES
Medicine	
Local brand	
Price	
Amount	
See
(generic name)	
(write in)	
(write in)	
recommended	
page
FOR BACTERIAL INFECTIONS:
1. Penicillin, 
250 mg. tablets	
40	
350
2. Cotrimoxazole
(sulfamethoxazole,
400 mg., with
trimethoprim, 80 mg.)	
100	
357
3. Ampicillin,
250 mg. capsules	
24	
352
FOR WORMS:
4. Mebendazole	
40 tablets
tablets	
of 100 mg.
	
	
or 2 bottles	
373
FOR FEVER AND PAIN:
5. Aspirin, 300 mg.
(5 grain) tablets	
50	
378
6. Acetaminophen, 
500 mg. tablets	
50	
379
FOR ANEMIA:
7. Iron (ferrous sulfate),
200 mg, pills (best if pills
also contain vitamin C
and folic acid)	
100	
392
FOR SCABIES AND LICE:
8. Permethrin	
1 bottle
	
  of shampoo
	
1 tube of cream	
372
FOR ITCHING AND VOMITING:
9. Promethazine,
25 mg. tablets	
12	
385
FOR MILD SKIN INFECTIONS:
10. Gentian violet,
small bottle; or an	
1 bottle
antibiotic ointment	
1 tube	
370
FOR EYE INFECTIONS:
11. Antibiotic eye
ointment	
1 tube	
378
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
336
THE VILLAGE MEDICINE KIT
This should have all the medicines and supplies mentioned in the Home Medicine 
Kit, but in larger amounts, depending on the size of your village and distance from a 
supply center. The Village Kit should also include the things listed here; many of them 
are for treatment of more dangerous illnesses. You will have to change or add to the 
list depending on the diseases in your area.
ADDITIONAL SUPPLIES
	
Supply	
Price 	
Amount	
Page
FOR INJECTING:
syringes, 5 ml.	
	
2	
65 
needles # 22, 3 cm long	
	
3–6
# 25, 1 1/2 cm long	
	
2–4
FOR TROUBLE URINATING:
catheter (rubber or plastic # 16 French)	
	
2	
239
FOR SPRAINS AND SWOLLEN VEINS:
elastic bandages,	
	
	
102,175
2 and 3 inches wide	
	
3–6 	
213
FOR LOOKING IN EARS, ETC:
penlight (small flashlight)	
	
1 	
34, 255, 	
	
	
	
309
ADDITIONAL MEDICINES
Medicine	
Local brand	
Price	
Amount	 Page
FOR SEVERE INFECTIONS:
1. Penicillin, injectable;
if only one, procaine
penicillin 600,000 U. per ml.	
20–40	
351
2. Ampicillin, injectable
250 mg. ampules	
20–40	
352
and/or streptomycin
1 g. vials for combined
use with penicillin (if ampicillin
is too expensive)	
20–40	
353
3. Tetracycline, capsules
or tablets 250 mg.	
40–80	
356
FOR AMEBA AND GIARDIA INFECTIONS:
4. Metronidazole, 250 mg. tablets	
40–80	
368
FOR SEIZURES:
5. Phenobarbital, 15 mg. tablets	
40–80	
389
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
337
Medicine	
Local brand	
Price	
Amount	 Page
FOR SEVERE ALLERGIC REACTIONS AND SEVERE ASTHMA:
6. Epinephrine (Adrenalin)
injections, ampules with 1 mg.	
5–10	
385
FOR ASTHMA:
7. Salbutamol, rescue inhaler	
1	
384
FOR SEVERE BLEEDING AFTER CHILDBIRTH:
8. Ergonovine, injections
or tablets of 0.2 mg.	
6–12	
390
OTHER MEDICINES NEEDED IN MANY BUT NOT ALL AREAS
WHERE DRY EYES (XEROPHTHALMIA) IS A PROBLEM:
Vitamin A, 200,000 U. capsules	
10–100	
391
WHERE TETANUS IS A PROBLEM:
Tetanus antitoxin, 50,000 units	
2–4
(Lyophilized if possible)	
bottles	
388
WHERE SNAKEBITE OR SCORPION STING IS A PROBLEM:
Specific antivenom	
2–6	
387
WHERE MALARIA IS A PROBLEM:
Artemisin-based combination
therapy, or whatever medicines	
50–200	
363-
are recommended in your area.	
	
367
	
	
TO PREVENT OR TREAT BLEEDING IN UNDERWEIGHT NEWBORNS:
Vitamin K, injections of 1 mg.	
3–6	
392
MEDICINES FOR CHRONIC DISEASES
It may or may not be wise to have medicines for chronic diseases such as 
tuberculosis, leprosy, and schistosomiasis in the Village Medicine Kit. To be sure 
a person has one of these diseases, often special tests must be made in a health 
center, where the necessary medicine can usually be obtained. Whether these and 
other medicines are included in the village medical supplies will depend on the local 
situation and the medical ability of those responsible.
VACCINES
Vaccines have not been included in the Village Medicine Kit because they 
are usually provided by the Health Department. However, a great effort should 
be made to see that all children are vaccinated as soon as they are old enough 
for the different vaccines (see p. 147). Therefore, if refrigeration is available, 
vaccines should be part of the village medical supplies—especially the DPT, polio, 
tuberculosis, and measles vaccines.
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
338
WORDS TO THE VILLAGE STOREKEEPER  
OR PHARMACIST
If you sell medicines in your store, people 
probably ask you about which medicines to 
buy and when or how to use them. You are in a 
position to have an important effect on people’s 
knowledge and health.
This book can help you to give correct 
advice and to see that your customers buy only 
those medicines they really need.
As you know, people too often spend the 
little money they have for medicines that do not 
help them. But you can help them understand 
their health needs more clearly and spend their 
money more wisely. For example:
•	 If people come asking for cough syrups, 
for a diarrhea thickener like Kaopectate, 
for vitamin B12 or liver extract to treat simple anemia, for penicillin to treat a sprain 
or ache, or for tetracycline when they have a cold, explain to them that these 
medicines are not needed and may do more harm than good. Discuss with them 
what to do instead.
•	 If someone wants to buy a vitamin tonic, encourage him to buy eggs, fruit, or 
vegetables instead. Help him understand that these have more vitamins and 
nutritional value for the money.
•	 If people ask for an injection when medicine by mouth would work as well and be 
safer—which is usually the case—tell them so.
•	 If someone wants to buy ‘cold tablets’ or some other expensive combination 
of medicines for a cold, encourage him to save money by buying plain aspirin, 
acetaminophen, or ibuprofen tablets and taking them with lots of liquids.
You may find it easier to tell people these things if you look up the information in this 
book, and read it together with them.
Above all, sell only useful medicines. Stock your store with the medicines and 
supplies listed for the Home and Village Medicine Kits, as well as other medicines and 
supplies that are important for common illnesses in your area. Try to stock low cost 
generic products or the least expensive brands. And never sell medicines that are 
expired, damaged, or useless.
Your store can become a place where people learn about caring for their own 
health. If you can help people use medicines intelligently, making sure that anyone 
who purchases a medicine is well informed as to its correct use and dosage, as 
well as the risks and precautions, you will provide an outstanding service to your 
community. Good luck!
Where There Is No Doctor 2011
